<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Poetry</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="the-trumpet" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Trumpet</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Rise up, rise up,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, as the trumpet blowing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chases the dreams of men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the dawn glowing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stars that left unlit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The land and water,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rise up and scatter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dew that covers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The print of last night’s lovers⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scatter it, scatter it!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>While you are listening</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the clear horn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forget, men, everything</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On this earth newborn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Except that it is lovelier</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than any mysteries.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Open your eyes to the air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That has washed the eyes of the stars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through all the dewy night:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up with the light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the old wars;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arise, arise!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-sign-post" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Sign-Post</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The dim sea glints chill. The white sun is shy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the skeleton weeds and the never-dry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rough, long grasses keep white with frost</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the hilltop by the finger-post;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The smoke of the traveller’s-joy is puffed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over hawthorn berry and hazel tuft.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I read the sign. Which way shall I go?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A voice says: You would not have doubted so</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At twenty. Another voice gentle with scorn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Says: At twenty you wished you had never been born.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>One hazel lost a leaf of gold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From a tuft at the tip, when the first voice told</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The other he wished to know what ’twould be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be sixty by this same post. “You shall see,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He laughed⁠—and I had to join his laughter⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“You shall see; but either before or after,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whatever happens, it must befall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mouthful of earth to remedy all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Regrets and wishes shall freely be given;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if there be a flaw in that heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twill be freedom to wish, and your wish may be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be here or anywhere talking to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No matter what the weather, on earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At any age between death and birth⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see what day or night can be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sun and the frost, the land and the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Summer, Autumn, Winter, Spring⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a poor man of any sort, down to a king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Standing upright out in the air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wondering where he shall journey, O where?”</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="tears" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Tears</h2>
			<p>
				<span>It seems I have no tears left. They should have fallen⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their ghosts, if tears have ghosts, did fall⁠—that day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When twenty hounds streamed by me, not yet combed out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But still all equals in their rage of gladness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the scent, made one, like a great dragon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Blooming Meadow that bends towards the sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And once bore hops: and on that other day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I stepped out from the double-shadowed Tower</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into an April morning, stirring and sweet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And warm. Strange solitude was there and silence.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mightier charm than any in the Tower</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Possessed the courtyard. They were changing guard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soldiers in line, young English countrymen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fair-haired and ruddy, in white tunics. Drums</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fifes were playing “<span epub:type="se:name.music.song">The British Grenadiers</span>.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The men, the music piercing that solitude</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And silence, told me truths I had not dreamed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And have forgotten since their beauty passed.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="two-pewits" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Two Pewits</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Under the after-sunset sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two pewits sport and cry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More white than is the moon on high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Riding the dark surge silently;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More black than earth. Their cry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is the one sound under the sky.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They alone move, now low, now high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And merrily they cry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the mischievous Spring sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plunging earthward, tossing high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over the ghost who wonders why</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So merrily they cry and fly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor choose ’twixt earth and sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the moon’s quarter silently</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rides, and earth rests as silently.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-manor-farm" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Manor Farm</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The rock-like mud unfroze a little and rills</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ran and sparkled down each side of the road</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under the catkins wagging in the hedge.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But earth would have her sleep out, spite of the sun;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor did I value that thin gilding beam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More than a pretty February thing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till I came down to the old Manor Farm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And church and yew-tree opposite, in age</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its equals and in size. The church and yew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And farmhouse slept in a Sunday silentness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The air raised not a straw. The steep farm roof,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With tiles duskily glowing, entertained</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mid-day sun; and up and down the roof</span>
				<br/>
				<span>White pigeons nestled. There was no sound but one.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three cart-horses were looking over a gate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drowsily through their forelocks, swishing their tails</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against a fly, a solitary fly.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Winter’s cheek flushed as if he had drained</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spring, Summer, and Autumn at a draught</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And smiled quietly. But ’twas not Winter⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rather a season of bliss unchangeable</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Awakened from farm and church where it had lain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Safe under tile and thatch for ages since</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This England, Old already, was called Merry.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-owl" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Owl</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Downhill I came, hungry, and yet not starved;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cold, yet had heat within me that was proof</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against the North wind; tired, yet so that rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had seemed the sweetest thing under a roof.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then at the inn I had food, fire, and rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knowing how hungry, cold, and tired was I.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All of the night was quite barred out except</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An owl’s cry, a most melancholy cry</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Shaken out long and clear upon the hill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No merry note, nor cause of merriment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But one telling me plain what I escaped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And others could not, that night, as in I went.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And salted was my food, and my repose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Salted and sobered, too, by the bird’s voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speaking for all who lay under the stars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soldiers and poor, unable to rejoice.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="swedes" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Swedes</h2>
			<p>
				<span>They have taken the gable from the roof of clay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the long swede pile. They have let in the sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the white and gold and purple of curled fronds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unsunned. It is a sight more tender-gorgeous</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the wood-corner where Winter moans and drips</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than when, in the Valley of the Tombs of Kings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A boy crawls down into a Pharaoh’s tomb</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, first of Christian men, beholds the mummy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God and monkey, chariot and throne and vase,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blue pottery, alabaster, and gold.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But dreamless long-dead Amen-hotep lies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is a dream of Winter, sweet as Spring.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="will-you-come" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Will You Come?</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Will you come?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will you come?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will you ride</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So late</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At my side?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O, will you come?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Will you come?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will you come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If the night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has a moon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full and bright?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O, will you come?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Would you come?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would you come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If the noon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not the moon?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beautiful, would you come?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Would you have come?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would you have come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without scorning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had it been</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still morning?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beloved, would you have come?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>If you come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Haste and come.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Owls have cried:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It grows dark</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To ride.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beloved, beautiful, come.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="as-the-teams-head-brass" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">As the Team’s Head-Brass</h2>
			<p>
				<span>As the team’s head-brass flashed out on the turn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lovers disappeared into the wood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I sat among the boughs of the fallen elm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That strewed an angle of the fallow, and</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Watched the plough narrowing a yellow square</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of charlock. Every time the horses turned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Instead of treading me down, the ploughman leaned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the handles to say or ask a word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About the weather, next about the war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scraping the share he faced towards the wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And screwed along the furrow till the brass flashed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once more.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="right">The blizzard felled the elm whose crest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I sat in, by a woodpecker’s round hole,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ploughman said. “When will they take it away?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“When the war’s over.” So the talk began⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One minute and an interval of ten,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A minute more and the same interval.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Have you been out?” “No.” “And don’t want</span>
				<br/>
				<span>to, perhaps?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“If I could only come back again, I should.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I could spare an arm. I shouldn’t want to lose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A leg. If I should lose my head, why, so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I should want nothing more.⁠ ⁠… Have many gone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From here?” “Yes.” “Many lost?” “Yes: good few.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only two teams work on the farm this year.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One of my mates is dead. The second day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In France they killed him. It was back in March,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The very night of the blizzard, too. Now if</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had stayed here we should have moved the tree.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And I should not have sat here. Everything</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would have been different. For it would have been</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another world.” “Ay, and a better, though</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If we could see all all might seem good.” Then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lovers came out of the wood again:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The horses started and for the last time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I watched the clods crumble and topple over</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After the ploughshare and the stumbling team.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="thaw" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Thaw</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Over the land freckled with snow half-thawed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The speculating rooks at their nests cawed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And saw from elm-tops, delicate as flower of grass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What we below could not see, Winter pass.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="interval" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Interval</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Gone the wild day:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wilder night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Coming makes way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For brief twilight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Where the firm soaked road</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mounts and is lost</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the high beech-wood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It shines almost.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The beeches keep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A stormy rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Breathing deep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of wind from the west.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The wood is black,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a misty steam.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above, the cloud pack</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Breaks for one gleam.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But the woodman’s cot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the ivied trees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Awakens not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To light or breeze.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>It smokes aloft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unwavering:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It hunches soft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under storm’s wing.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>It has no care</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For gleam or gloom:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It stays there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While I shall roam,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Die, and forget</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hill of trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gleam, the wet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This roaring peace.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="like-the-touch-of-rain" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Like the Touch of Rain</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Like the touch of rain she was</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On a man’s flesh and hair and eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the joy of walking thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has taken him by surprise:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>With the love of the storm he burns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sings, he laughs, well I know how,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But forgets when he returns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As I shall not forget her “Go now.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Those two words shut a door</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between me and the blessed rain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That was never shut before</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And will not open again.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-path" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Path</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Running along a bank, a parapet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That saves from the precipitous wood below</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The level road, there is a path. It serves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Children for looking down the long smooth steep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between the legs of beech and yew, to where</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fallen tree checks the sight: while men and women</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Content themselves with the road and what they see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over the bank, and what the children tell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The path, winding like silver, trickles on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bordered and even invaded by thinnest moss</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That tries to cover roots and crumbling chalk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With gold, olive, and emerald, but in vain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The children wear it. They have flattened the bank</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On top, and silvered it between the moss</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the current of their feet, year after year.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the road is houseless, and leads not to school.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see a child is rare there, and the eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has but the road, the wood that overhangs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And underyawns it, and the path that looks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if it led on to some legendary</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or fancied place where men have wished to go</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stay; till, sudden, it ends where the wood ends.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-combe" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Combe</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The Combe was ever dark, ancient and dark.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its mouth is stopped with bramble, thorn, and briar;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And no one scrambles over the sliding chalk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By beech and yew and perishing juniper</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down the half precipices of its sides, with roots</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rabbit holes for steps. The sun of Winter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The moon of Summer, and all the singing birds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Except the missel-thrush that loves juniper,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are quite shut out. But far more ancient and dark</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Combe looks since they killed the badger there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dug him out and gave him to the hounds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That most ancient Briton of English beasts.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="if-i-should-ever-by-chance" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">If I Should Ever by Chance</h2>
			<p>
				<span>If I should ever by chance grow rich</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll buy Codham, Cockridden, and Childerditch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Roses, Pyrgo, and Lapwater,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let them all to my elder daughter.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rent I shall ask of her will be only</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each year’s first violets, white and lonely,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The first primroses and orchises⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She must find them before I do, that is.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But if she finds a blossom on furze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without rent they shall all for ever be hers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Codham, Cockridden, and Childerditch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Roses, Pyrgo and Lapwater⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I shall give them all to my elder daughter.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="what-shall-i-give" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">What Shall I Give?</h2>
			<p>
				<span>What shall I give my daughter the younger</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More than will keep her from cold and hunger?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I shall not give her anything.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If she shared South Weald and Havering,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their acres, the two brooks running between,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Paine’s Brook and Weald Brook,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With pewit, woodpecker, swan, and rook,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She would be no richer than the queen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who once on a time sat in Havering Bower</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone, with the shadows, pleasure and power.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She could do no more with Samarcand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or the mountains of a mountain land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And its far white house above cottages</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like Venus above the Pleiades.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her small hands I would not cumber</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With so many acres and their lumber,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But leave her Steep and her own world</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And her spectacled self with hair uncurled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wanting a thousand little things</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That time without contentment brings.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="if-i-were-to-own" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">If I Were to Own</h2>
			<p>
				<span>If I were to own this countryside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As far as a man in a day could ride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Tyes were mine for giving or letting⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wingle Tye and Margaretting</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tye⁠—and Skreens, Gooshays, and Cockerells,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shellow, Rochetts, Bandish, and Pickerells,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Marlins, Lambkins, and Lillyputs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their copses, ponds, roads, and ruts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fields where plough-horses steam and plovers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fling and whimper, hedges that lovers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love, and orchards, shrubberies, walls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the sun untroubled by north wind falls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And single trees where the thrush sings well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His proverbs untranslatable,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I would give them all to my son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If he would let me any one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For a song, a blackbird’s song, at dawn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He should have no more, till on my lawn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never a one was left, because I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had shot them to put them into a pie⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His Essex blackbirds, every one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I was left old and alone.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then unless I could pay, for rent, a song</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As sweet as a blackbird’s, and as long⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No more⁠—he should have the house, not I:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Margaretting or Wingle Tye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or it might be Skreens, Gooshays, or Cockerells,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shellow, Rochetts, Bandish, or Pickerells,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Martins, Lambkins, or Lillyputs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should be his till the cart tracks had no ruts.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="and-you-helen" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">And You, Helen</h2>
			<p>
				<span>And you, Helen, what should I give you?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So many things I would give you</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had I an infinite great store</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Offered me and I stood before</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To choose. I would give you youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All kinds of loveliness and truth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A clear eye as good as mine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lands, waters, flowers, wine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As many children as your heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might wish for, a far better art</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than mine can be, all you have lost</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the travelling waters tossed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or given to me. If I could choose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Freely in that great treasure-house</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Anything from any shelf,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I would give you back yourself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And power to discriminate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What you want and want it not too late,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many fair days free from care</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And heart to enjoy both foul and fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And myself, too, if I could find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where it lay hidden and it proved kind.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="when-first" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">When First</h2>
			<p>
				<span>When first I came here I had hope,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hope for I knew not what. Fast beat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My heart at sight of the tall slope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or grass and yews, as if my feet</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Only by scaling its steps of chalk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would see something no other hill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ever disclosed. And now I walk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down it the last time. Never will</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>My heart beat so again at sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of any hill although as fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And loftier. For infinite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The change, late unperceived, this year,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The twelfth, suddenly, shows me plain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hope now⁠—not health, nor cheerfulness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since they can come and go again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As often one brief hour witnesses⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Just hope has gone for ever. Perhaps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I may love other hills yet more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than this: the future and the maps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hide something I was waiting for.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>One thing I know, that love with chance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And use and time and necessity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will grow, and louder the heart’s dance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At parting than at meeting be.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="head-and-bottle" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Head and Bottle</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The downs will lose the sun, white alyssum</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lose the bees’ hum;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But head and bottle tilted back in the cart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will never part</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till I am cold as midnight and all my hours</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are beeless flowers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He neither sees, nor hears, nor smells, nor thinks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But only drinks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quiet in the yard where tree trunks do not lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More quietly.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="after-you-speak" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">After You Speak</h2>
			<p>
				<span>After you speak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And what you meant</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meet yours that mean⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With your cheeks and hair⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Something more wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More dark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And far different.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even so the lark</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loves dust</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And nestles in it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The minute</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before he must</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soar in lone flight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So far,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a black star</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He seems⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mote</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of singing dust</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Afloat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That dreams</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sheds no light.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I know your lust</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is love.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="sowing" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Sowing</h2>
			<p>
				<span>It was a perfect day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For sowing; just</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As sweet and dry was the ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As tobacco-dust.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I tasted deep the hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between the far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Owl’s chuckling first soft cry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the first star.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A long stretched hour it was;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nothing undone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remained; the early seeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All safely sown.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And now, hark at the rain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Windless and light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Half a kiss, half a tear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saying good night.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="when-we-two-walked" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">When We Two Walked</h2>
			<p>
				<span>When we two walked in Lent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We imagined that happiness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was something different</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And this was something less.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But happy were we to hide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our happiness, not as they were</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who acted in their pride</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Juno and Jupiter:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For the Gods in their jealousy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Murdered that wife and man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we that were wise live free</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To recall our happiness then.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="in-memoriam-easter-1915" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">In Memoriam (Easter, 1915)</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The flowers left thick at nightfall in the wood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This Eastertide call into mind the men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now far from home, who, with their sweethearts, should</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have gathered them and will do never again.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="fifty-faggots" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Fifty Faggots</h2>
			<p>
				<span>There they stand, on their ends, the fifty faggots</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That once were underwood of hazel and ash</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Jenny Pinks’s Copse. Now, by the hedge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Close packed, they make a thicket fancy alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can creep through with the mouse and wren. Next Spring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A blackbird or a robin will nest there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Accustomed to them, thinking they will remain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whatever is for ever to a bird:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This Spring it is too late; the swift has come.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas a hot day for carrying them up:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Better they will never warm me, though they must</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Light several Winters’ fires. Before they are done</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The war will have ended, many other things</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have ended, maybe, that I can no more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Foresee or more control than robin and wren.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="women-he-liked" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Women He Liked</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Women he liked, did shovel-bearded Bob,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old Farmer Hayward of the Heath, but he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loved horses. He himself was like a cob,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And leather-coloured. Also he loved a tree.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For the life in them he loved most living things,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But a tree chiefly. All along the lane</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He planted elms where now the stormcock sings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That travellers hear from the slow-climbing train.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Till then the track had never had a name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For all its thicket and the nightingales</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That should have earned it. No one was to blame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To name a thing beloved man sometimes fails.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Many years since, Bob Hayward died, and now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>None passes there because the mist and the rain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of the elms have turned the lane to slough</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gloom, the name alone survives, Bob’s Lane.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="early-one-morning" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Early One Morning</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Early one morning in May I set out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And nobody I knew was about.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I’m bound away for ever,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Away somewhere, away for ever.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There was no wind to trouble the weathercocks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I had burnt my letters and darned my socks.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>No one knew I was going away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I thought myself I should come back some day.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I heard the brook through the town gardens run.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O sweet was the mud turned to dust by the sun.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A gate banged in a fence and banged in my head.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“A fine morning, sir,” a shepherd said.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I could not return from my liberty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To my youth and my love and my misery.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The past is the only dead thing that smells sweet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The only sweet thing that is not also fleet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I’m bound away for ever,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Away somewhere, away for ever.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-cherry-trees" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Cherry Trees</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The cherry trees bend over and are shedding</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the old road where all that passed are dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their petals, strewing the grass as for a wedding</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This early May morn when there is none to wed.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="it-rains" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">It Rains</h2>
			<p>
				<span>It rains, and nothing stirs within the fence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Anywhere through the orchard’s untrodden, dense</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forest of parsley. The great diamonds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of rain on the grass-blades there is none to break,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or the fallen petals further down to shake.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And I am nearly as happy as possible</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To search the wilderness in vain though well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To think of two walking, kissing there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drenched, yet forgetting the kisses of the rain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sad, too, to think that never, never again,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Unless alone, so happy shall I walk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the rain. When I turn away, on its fine stalk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twilight has fined to naught, the parsley flower</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Figures, suspended still and ghostly white,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The past hovering as it revisits the light.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-huxter" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Huxter</h2>
			<p>
				<span>He has a hump like an ape on his back;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He has of money a plentiful lack;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And but for a gay coat of double his girth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is not a plainer thing on the earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This fine May morning.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But the huxter has a bottle of beer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He drives a cart and his wife sits near</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who does not heed his lack or his hump;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they laugh as down the lane they bump</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This fine May morning.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-gentleman" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Gentleman</h2>
			<p>
				<span>“He has robbed two clubs. The judge at Salisbury</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can’t give him more than he undoubtedly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deserves. The scoundrel! Look at his photograph!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A lady-killer! Hanging’s too good by half</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For such as he.” So said the stranger, one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With crimes yet undiscovered or undone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But at the inn the Gipsy dame began:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Now he was what I call a gentleman.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He went along with Carrie, and when she</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had a baby he paid up so readily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His half a crown. Just like him. A crown’d have been</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More like him. For I never knew him mean.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh! but he was such a nice gentleman. Oh!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Last time we met he said if me and Joe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was anywhere near we must be sure and call.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He put his arms around our Amos all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if he were his own son. I pray God</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save him from justice! Nicer man never trod.”</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-bridge" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Bridge</h2>
			<p>
				<span>I have come a long way to-day:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On a strange bridge alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remembering friends, old friends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I rest, without smile or moan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As they remember me without smile or moan.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>All are behind, the kind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the unkind too, no more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To-night than a dream. The stream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Runs softly yet drowns the Past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dark-lit stream has drowned the Future and the Past.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>No traveller has rest more blest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than this moment brief between</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two lives, when the Night’s first lights</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shades hide what has never been,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Things goodlier, lovelier, dearer, than will be or have been.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="lob" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Lob</h2>
			<p>
				<span>At hawthorn-time in Wiltshire travelling</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In search of something chance would never bring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An old man’s face, by life and weather cut</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And coloured⁠—rough, brown, sweet as any nut⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A land face, sea-blue-eyed⁠—hung in my mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I had left him many a mile behind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All he said was: “Nobody can’t stop ’ee. It’s</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A footpath, right enough. You see those bits</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of mounds⁠—that’s where they opened up the barrows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sixty years since, while I was scaring sparrows.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They thought as there was something to find there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But couldn’t find it, by digging, anywhere.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To turn back then and seek him, where was the use?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There were three Manningfords⁠—Abbots, Bohun, and Bruce:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And whether Alton, not Manningford, it was,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My memory could not decide, because</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There was both Alton Barnes and Alton Priors.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All had their churches, graveyards, farms, and byres,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lurking to one side up the paths and lanes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seldom well seen except by aeroplanes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when bells rang, or pigs squealed, or cocks crowed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then only heard. Ages ago the road</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Approached. The people stood and looked and turned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor asked it to come nearer, nor yet learned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To move out there and dwell in all men’s dust.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet withal they shot the weathercock, just</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because ’twas he crowed out of tune, they said:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So now the copper weathercock is dead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If they had reaped their dandelions and sold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Them fairly, they could have afforded gold.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Many years passed, and I went back again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among those villages, and looked for men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who might have known my ancient. He himself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had long been dead or laid upon the shelf,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I thought. One man I asked about him roared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At my description: “ ’Tis old Bottlesford</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He means, Bill.” But another said: “Of course,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was Jack Button up at the White Horse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’s dead, sir, these three years.” This lasted till</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A girl proposed Walker of Walker’s Hill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Old Adam Walker. Adam’s Point you’ll see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Marked on the maps.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="right">“That was her roguery,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The next man said. He was a squire’s son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who loved wild bird and beast, and dog and gun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For killing them. He had loved them from his birth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One with another, as he loved the earth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The man may be like Button, or Walker, or</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like Bottlesford, that you want, but far more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sounds like one I saw when I was a child.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I could almost swear to him. The man was wild</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wandered. His home was where he was free.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Everybody has met one such man as he.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Does he keep clear old paths that no one uses</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But once a life-time when he loves or muses?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He is English as this gate, these flowers, this mire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when at eight years old Lob-lie-by-the-fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came in my books, this was the man I saw.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He has been in England as long as dove and daw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Calling the wild cherry tree the merry tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rose campion Bridget-in-her-bravery;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in a tender mood he, as I guess,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Christened one flower Love-in-idleness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And while he walked from Exeter to Leeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One April called all cuckoo-flowers Milkmaids.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From him old herbal Gerard learnt, as a boy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To name wild clematis the Traveller’s-joy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our blackbirds sang no English till his ear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Told him they called his Jan Toy ‘Pretty dear.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(She was Jan Toy the Lucky, who, having lost</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A shilling, and found a penny loaf, rejoiced.)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For reasons of his own to him the wren</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is Jenny Pooter. Before all other men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas he first called the Hog’s Back the Hog’s Back.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Mother Dunch’s Buttocks should not lack</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their name was his care. He too could explain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Totteridge and Totterdown and Juggler’s Lane:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He knows, if anyone. Why Tumbling Bay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inland in Kent, is called so, he might say.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“But little he says compared with what he does.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If ever a sage troubles him he will buzz</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a beehive to conclude the tedious fray:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the sage, who knows all languages, runs away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet Lob has thirteen hundred names for a fool,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And though he never could spare time for school</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To unteach what the fox so well expressed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On biting the cock’s head off⁠—Quietness is best⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He can talk quite as well as anyone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After his thinking is forgot and done.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He first of all told someone else’s wife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For a farthing she’d skin a flint and spoil a knife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Worth sixpence skinning it. She heard him speak:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘She had a face as long as a wet week’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Said he, telling the tale in after years.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With blue smock and with gold rings in his ears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sometimes he is a pedlar, not too poor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To keep his wit. This is tall Tom that bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The logs in, and with Shakespeare in the hall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once talked, when icicles hung by the wall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As Herne the Hunter he has known hard times.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On sleepless nights he made up weather rhymes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which others spoilt. And, Hob being then his name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He kept the hog that thought the butcher came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bring his breakfast ‘You thought wrong,’ said Hob.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When there were kings in Kent this very Lob,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose sheep grew fat and he himself grew merry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wedded the king’s daughter of Canterbury;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he alone, unlike squire, lord, and king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Watched a night by her without slumbering;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He kept both waking. When he was but a lad</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He won a rich man’s heiress, deaf, dumb, and sad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By rousing her to laugh at him. He carried</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His donkey on his back. So they were married.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And while he was a little cobbler’s boy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He tricked the giant coming to destroy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shrewsbury by flood. ‘And how far is it yet?’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The giant asked in passing. ‘I forget;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But see these shoes I’ve worn out on the road</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we’re not there yet.’ He emptied out his load</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of shoes for mending. The giant let fall from his spade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The earth for damming Severn, and thus made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Wrekin hill; and little Ercall hill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rose where the giant scraped his boots. While still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So young, our Jack was chief of Gotham’s sages.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But long before he could have been wise, ages</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Earlier than this, while he grew thick and strong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ate his bacon, or, at times, sang a song</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And merely smelt it, as Jack the giant-killer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He made a name. He too ground up the miller,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Yorkshireman who ground men’s bones for flour.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Do you believe Jack dead before his hour?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or that his name is Walker, or Bottlesford,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or Button, a mere clown, or squire, or lord?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The man you saw⁠—Lob-lie-by-the-fire, Jack Cade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jack Smith, Jack Moon, poor Jack of every trade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Young Jack, or old Jack, or Jack What-d’ye-call,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jack-in-the-hedge, or Robin-run-by-the-wall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Robin Hood, Ragged Robin, lazy Bob,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One of the lords of No Man’s Land, good Lob⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although he was seen dying at Waterloo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hastings, Agincourt, and Sedgemoor too⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lives yet. He never will admit he is dead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till millers cease to grind men’s bones for bread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not till our weathercock crows once again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I remove my house out of the lane</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On to the road.” With this he disappeared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In hazel and thorn tangled with old-man’s-beard.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But one glimpse of his back, as there he stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Choosing his way, proved him of old Jack’s blood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Young Jack perhaps, and now a Wiltshireman</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As he has oft been since his days began.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="bright-clouds" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Bright Clouds</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Bright clouds of may</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shade half the pond.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All but one bay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of emerald</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tall reeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like criss-cross bayonets</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where a bird once called,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lies bright as the sun.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No one heeds.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The light wind frets</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drifts the scum</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of may-blossom.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till the moorhen calls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Naught’s to be done</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By birds or men.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still the may falls.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-clouds-that-are-so-light" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Clouds That Are So Light</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The clouds that are so light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beautiful, swift and bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cast shadows on field and park</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the earth that is so dark,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And even so now, light one!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beautiful, swift and bright one!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You let fall on a heart that was dark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unillumined, a deeper mark.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But clouds would have, without earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To shadow, far less worth:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Away from your shadow on me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your beauty less would be,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And if it still be treasured</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An age hence, it shall be measured</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By this small dark spot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without which it were not.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="some-eyes-condemn" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Some Eyes Condemn</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Some eyes condemn the earth they gaze upon:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some wait patiently till they know far more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than earth can tell them: some laugh at the whole</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As folly of another’s making: one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I knew that laughed because he saw, from core</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To rind, not one thing worth the laugh his soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had ready at waking: some eyes have begun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With laughing; some stand startled at the door.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Others, too, I have seen rest, question, roll,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dance, shoot. And many I have loved watching</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I could not take my eyes from till they turned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And loving died. I had not found my goal.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But thinking of your eyes, dear, I become</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dumb: for they flamed, and it was me they burned.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="may-23" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">May 23</h2>
			<p>
				<span>There never was a finer day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And never will be while May is May⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The third, and not the last of its kind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But though fair and clear the two behind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seemed pursued by tempests overpast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the morrow with fear that it could not last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was spoiled. To-day ere the stones were warm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Five minutes of thunderstorm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dashed it with rain, as if to secure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By one tear, its beauty the luck to endure.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>At mid-day then along the lane</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old Jack Noman appeared again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jaunty and old, crooked and tall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stopped and grinned at me over the wall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a cowslip bunch in his button-hole</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And one in his cap. Who could say if his roll</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came from flints in the road, the weather, or ale?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was welcome as the nightingale.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not an hour of the sun had been wasted on Jack</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I’ve got my Indian complexion back”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Said he. He was tanned like a harvester,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like his short clay pipe, like the leaf and bur</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That clung to his coat from last night’s bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the ploughland crumbling red.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fairer flowers were none on the earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than his cowslips wet with the dew of their birth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or fresher leaves than the cress in his basket.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Where did they come from, Jack?” “Don’t ask it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And you’ll be told no lies.” “Very well:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then I can’t buy.” “I don’t want to sell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take them and these flowers, too, free.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perhaps you have something to give me?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wait till next time. The better the day⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Lord couldn’t make a better, I say;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If he could, he never has done.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So off went Jack with his roll-walk-run,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaving his cresses from Oakshott rill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his cowslips from Wheatham hill.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>’Twas the first day that the midges bit;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But though they bit me, I was glad of it:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the dust in my face, too, I was glad.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spring could do nothing to make me sad.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bluebells hid all the ruts in the copse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The elm seeds lay in the road like hops,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That fine day, May the twenty-third,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The day Jack Noman disappeared.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-glory" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Glory</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The glory of the beauty of the morning⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cuckoo crying over the untouched dew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blackbird that has found it, and the dove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That tempts me on to something sweeter than love;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>White clouds ranged even and fair as new-mown hay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heat, the stir, the sublime vacancy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of sky and meadow and forest and my own heart:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The glory invites me, yet it leaves me scorning</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All I can ever do, all I can be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside the lovely of motion, shape, and hue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The happiness I fancy fit to dwell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In beauty’s presence. Shall I now this day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Begin to seek as far as heaven, as hell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wisdom or strength to match this beauty, start</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tread the pale dust pitted with small dark drops,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In hope to find whatever it is I seek,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hearkening to short-lived happy-seeming things</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That we know naught of, in the hazel copse?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or must I be content with discontent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As larks and swallows are perhaps with wings?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shall I ask at the day’s end once more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What beauty is, and what I can have meant</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By happiness? And shall I let all go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glad, weary, or both? Or shall I perhaps know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I was happy oft and oft before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Awhile forgetting how I am fast pent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How dreary-swift, with naught to travel to,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is Time? I cannot bite the day to the core.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="melancholy" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Melancholy</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The rain and wind, the rain and wind, raved endlessly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On me the Summer storm, and fever, and melancholy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrought magic, so that if I feared the solitude</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far more I feared all company: too sharp, too rude,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had been the wisest or the dearest human voice.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What I desired I knew not, but whate’er my choice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vain it must be, I knew. Yet naught did my despair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But sweeten the strange sweetness, while through the wild air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All day long I heard a distant cuckoo calling</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, soft as dulcimers, sounds of near water falling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, softer, and remote as if in history,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rumours of what had touched my friends, my foes, or me.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="adelstrop" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Adlestrop</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Yes. I remember Adlestrop⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The name, because one afternoon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of heat the express-train drew up there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unwontedly. It was late June.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The steam hissed. Someone cleared his throat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No one left and no one came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the bare platform. What I saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was Adlestrop⁠—only the name</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And willows, willow-herb, and grass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And meadowsweet, and haycocks dry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No whit less still and lonely fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than the high cloudlets in the sky.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And for that minute a blackbird sang</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Close by, and round him, mistier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Farther and farther, all the birds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Oxfordshire and Gloucestershire.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-green-roads" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Green Roads</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The green roads that end in the forest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are strewn with white goose feathers this June,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Like marks left behind by some one gone to the forest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To show his track. But he has never come back.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Down each green road a cottage looks at the forest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round one the nettle towers; two are bathed in flowers.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>An old man along the green road to the forest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strays from one, from another a child alone.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In the thicket bordering the forest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All day long a thrush twiddles his song.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>It is old, but the trees are young in the forest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All but one like a castle keep, in the middle deep.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>That oak saw the ages pass in the forest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They were a host, but their memories are lost,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For the tree is dead: all things forget the forest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Excepting perhaps me, when now I see</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The old man, the child, the goose feathers at the edge of the forest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hear all day long the thrush repeat his song.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-mill-pond" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Mill-Pond</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The sun blazed while the thunder yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Added a boom:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wagtail flickered bright over</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mill-pond’s gloom:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Less than the cooing in the alder</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Isles of the pool</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sounded the thunder through that plunge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of waters cool.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Scared starlings on the aspen tip</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Past the black mill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Outchattered the stream and the next roar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far on the hill.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As my feet dangling teased the foam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That slid below</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A girl came out. “Take care!” she said⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ages ago.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She startled me, standing quite close</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dressed all in white:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ages ago I was angry till</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She passed from sight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then the storm burst, and as I crouched</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To shelter, how</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beautiful and kind, too, she seemed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As she does now!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="it-was-upon" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">It Was Upon</h2>
			<p>
				<span>It was upon a July evening.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At a stile I stood, looking along a path</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over the country by a second Spring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drenched perfect green again. “The lattermath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will be a fine one.” So the stranger said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wandering man. Albeit I stood at rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flushed with desire I was. The earth outspread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like meadows of the future, I possessed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And as an unaccomplished prophecy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stranger’s words, after the interval</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a score years, when those fields are by me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never to be recrossed, now I recall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This July eve, and question, wondering,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What of the lattermath to this hoar Spring?</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="tall-nettles" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Tall Nettles</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Tall nettles cover up, as they have done</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These many springs, the rusty harrow, the plough</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long worn out, and the roller made of stone:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only the elm butt tops the nettles now.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This corner of the farmyard I like most:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As well as any bloom upon a flower</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I like the dust on the nettles, never lost</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Except to prove the sweetness of a shower.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="haymaking" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Haymaking</h2>
			<p>
				<span>After night’s thunder far away had rolled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fiery day had a kernel sweet of cold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the perfect blue the clouds uncurled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the first gods before they made the world</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And misery, swimming the stormless sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In beauty and in divine gaiety.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The smooth white empty road was lightly strewn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With leaves⁠—the holly’s Autumn falls in June⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fir cones standing stiff up in the heat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mill-foot water tumbled white and lit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With tossing crystals, happier than any crowd</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of children pouring out of school aloud.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the little thickets where a sleeper</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For ever might lie lost, the nettle-creeper</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And garden warbler sang unceasingly;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While over them shrill shrieked in his fierce glee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The swift with wings and tail as sharp and narrow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if the bow had flown off with the arrow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only the scent of woodbine and hay new-mown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Travelled the road. In the field sloping down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Park-like, to where its willows showed the brook,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Haymakers rested. The tosser lay forsook</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out in the sun; and the long wagon stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without its team, it seemed it never would</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Move from the shadow of that single yew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The team, as still, until their task was due,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside the labourers enjoyed the shade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That three squat oaks mid-field together made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon a circle of grass and weed uncut,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on the hollow, once a chalk-pit, but</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now brimmed with nut and elder-flower so clean.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The men leaned on their rakes, about to begin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But still. And all were silent. All was old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This morning time, with a great age untold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Older than Clare and Cobbett, Morland and Crome,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than, at the field’s far edge, the farmer’s home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A white house crouched at the foot of a great tree.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under the heavens that know not what years be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The men, the beasts, the trees, the implements</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Uttered even what they will in times far hence⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All of us gone out of the reach of change⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Immortal in a picture of an old grange.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="how-at-once" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">How at Once</h2>
			<p>
				<span>How at once should I know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When stretched in the harvest blue</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I saw the swift’s black bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I would not have that view</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until next May</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Again it is due?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The same year after year⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But with the swift alone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With other things I but fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That they will be over and done</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Suddenly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I only see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Them to know them gone.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="gone-gone-again" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Gone, Gone Again</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Gone, gone again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May, June, July,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And August gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Again gone by,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Not memorable</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save that I saw them go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As past the empty quays</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rivers flow.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And now again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the harvest rain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Blenheim oranges</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fall grubby from the trees,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As when I was young⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when the lost one was here⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when the war began</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To turn young men to dung.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Look at the old house,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Outmoded, dignified,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dark and untenanted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With grass growing instead</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Of the footsteps of life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The friendliness, the strife;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In its beds have lain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Youth, love, age and pain:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I am something like that;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only I am not dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still breathing and interested</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the house that is not dark:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I am something like that:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not one pane to reflect the sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the schoolboys to throw at⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They have broken every one.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-sun-used-to-shine" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Sun Used to Shine</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The sun used to shine while we two walked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slowly together, paused and started</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Again, and sometimes mused, sometimes talked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As either pleased, and cheerfully parted</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Each night. We never disagreed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which gate to rest on. The to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the late past we gave small heed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We turned from men or poetry</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To rumours of the war remote</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only till both stood disinclined</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For aught but the yellow flavorous coat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of an apple wasps had undermined;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Or a sentry of dark betonies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stateliest of small flowers on earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the forest verge; or crocuses</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pale purple as if they had their birth</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In sunless Hades fields. The war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came back to mind with the moonrise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which soldiers in the east afar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beheld then. Nevertheless, our eyes</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Could as well imagine the Crusades</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or Caesar’s battles. Everything</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To faintness like those rumours fades⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the brook’s water glittering</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Under the moonlight⁠—like those walks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now⁠—like us two that took them, and</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fallen apples, all the talks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And silences⁠—like memory’s sand</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When the tide covers it late or soon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And other men through other flowers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In those fields under the same moon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go talking and have easy hours.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="october" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">October</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The green elm with the one great bough of gold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lets leaves into the grass slip, one by one⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The short hill grass, the mushrooms small milk-white,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Harebell and scabious and tormentil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That blackberry and gorse, in dew and sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bow down to; and the wind travels too light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To shake the fallen birch leaves from the fern;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gossamers wander at their own will.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At heavier steps than birds’ the squirrels scold.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The rich scene has grown fresh again and new</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As Spring and to the touch is not more cool</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than it is warm to the gaze; and now I might</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As happy be as earth is beautiful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were I some other or with earth could turn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In alternation of violet and rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Harebell and snowdrop, at their season due,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gorse that has no time not to be gay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But if this be not happiness⁠—who knows?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some day I shall think this a happy day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And this mood by the name of melancholy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall no more blackened and obscured be.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-long-small-room" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Long Small Room</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The long small room that showed willows in the west</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Narrowed up to the end the fireplace filled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although not wide. I liked it. No one guessed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What need or accident made them so build.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Only the moon, the mouse and the sparrow peeped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In from the ivy round the casement thick.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all they saw and heard there they shall keep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tale for the old ivy and older brick.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When I look back I am like moon, sparrow and mouse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That witnessed what they could never understand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or alter or prevent in the dark house.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One thing remains the same⁠—this my right hand</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Crawling crab-like over the clean white page,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Resting awhile each morning on the pillow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then once more starting to crawl on towards age.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hundred last leaves stream upon the willow.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="liberty" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Liberty</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The last light has gone out of the world, except</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This moonlight lying on the grass like frost</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond the brink of the tall elm’s shadow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is as if everything else had slept</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many an age, unforgotten and lost</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The men that were, the things done, long ago,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All I have thought; and but the moon and I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Live yet and here stand idle over the grave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where all is buried. Both have liberty</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To dream what we could do if we were free</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To do some thing we had desired long,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The moon and I. There’s none less free than who</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Does nothing and has nothing else to do,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Being free only for what is not to his mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And nothing is to his mind. If every hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like this one passing that I have spent among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wiser others when I have forgot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To wonder whether I was free or not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were piled before me, and not lost behind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I could take and carry them away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I should be rich; or if I had the power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To wipe out every one and not again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Regret, I should be rich to be so poor.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet I still am half in love with pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With what is imperfect, with both tears and mirth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With things that have an end, with life and earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And this moon that leaves me dark within the door.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="november" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">November</h2>
			<p>
				<span>November’s days are thirty:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>November’s earth is dirty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those thirty days, from first to last;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the prettiest things on ground are the paths</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With morning and evening hobnails dinted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With foot and wing-tip overprinted</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or separately charactered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of little beast and little bird.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fields are mashed by sheep, the roads</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make the worst going, the best the woods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where dead leaves upward and downward scatter.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Few care for the mixture of earth and water,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twig, leaf, flint, thorn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Straw, feather, all that men scorn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pounded up and sodden by flood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Condemned as mud.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But of all the months when earth is greener</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not one has clean skies that are cleaner.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clean and clear and sweet and cold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They shine above the earth so old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the after-tempest cloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sails over in silence though winds are loud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till the full moon in the east</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looks at the planet in the west</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And earth is silent as it is black,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet not unhappy for its lack.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up from the dirty earth men stare:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One imagines a refuge there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above the mud, in the pure bright</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the cloudless heavenly light:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another loves earth and November more dearly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because without them, he sees clearly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sky would be nothing more to his eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than he, in any case, is to the sky;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He loves even the mud whose dyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Renounce all brightness to the skies.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-sheiling" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Sheiling</h2>
			<p>
				<span>It stands alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up in a land of stone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All worn like ancient stairs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A land of rocks and trees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nourished on wind and stone.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And all within</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long delicate has been;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By arts and kindliness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Coloured, sweetened, and warmed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For many years has been.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Safe resting there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Men hear in the travelling air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But music, pictures see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the same daily land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Painted by the wild air.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>One maker’s mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made both, and the house is kind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the land that gave it peace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the stone has taken the house</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To its cold heart and is kind.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-gallows" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Gallows</h2>
			<p>
				<span>There was a weasel lived in the sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all his family,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till a keeper shot him with his gun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hung him up on a tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where he swings in the wind and rain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the sun and in the snow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without pleasure, without pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the dead oak tree bough.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There was a crow who was no sleeper,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But a thief and a murderer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till a very late hour; and this keeper</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made him one of the things that were,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hang and flap in rain and wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the sun and in the snow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There are no more sins to be sinned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the dead oak tree bough.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There was a magpie, too,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had a long tongue and a long tail;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He could both talk and do⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But what did that avail?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He, too, flaps in the wind and rain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alongside weasel and crow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without pleasure, without pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the dead oak tree bough.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And many other beasts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And birds, skin, bone and feather,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have been taken from their feasts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hung up there together,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To swing and have endless leisure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the sun and in the snow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without pain, without pleasure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the dead oak tree bough.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="birds-nests" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Birds’ Nests</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The summer nests uncovered by autumn wind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some torn, others dislodged, all dark.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Everyone sees them: low or high in tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or hedge, or single bush, they hang like a mark.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Since there’s no need of eyes to see them with</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I cannot help a little shame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I missed most, even at eye’s level, till</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The leaves blew off and made the seeing no game.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>’Tis a light pang. I like to see the nests</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still in their places, now first known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At home and by far roads. Boys knew them not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whatever jays and squirrels may have done.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And most I like the winter nests deep-hid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That leaves and berries fell into;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once a dormouse dined there on hazel-nuts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And grass and goose-grass seeds found soil and grew.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="rain" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Rain</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Rain, midnight rain, nothing but the wild rain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On this bleak hut, and solitude, and me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remembering again that I shall die</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And neither hear the rain nor give it thanks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For washing me cleaner than I have been</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since I was born into this solitude.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blessed are the dead that the rain rains upon:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But here I pray that none whom once I loved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is dying to-night or lying still awake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Solitary, listening to the rain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Either in pain or thus in sympathy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Helpless among the living and the dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a cold water among broken reeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Myriads of broken reeds all still and stiff,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like me who have no love which this wild rain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has not dissolved except the love of death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If love it be towards what is perfect and</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cannot, the tempest tells me, disappoint.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="home-1" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">“Home”</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Fair was the morning, fair our tempers, and</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We had seen nothing fairer than that land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though strange, and the untrodden snow that made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wild of the tame, casting out all that was</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not wild and rustic and old; and we were glad.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Fair, too, was afternoon, and first to pass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were we that league of snow, next the north wind</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There was nothing to return for, except need,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet we sang nor ever stopped for speed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As we did often with the start behind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Faster still strode we when we came in sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the cold roofs where we must spend the night.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Happy we had not been there, nor could be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though we had tasted sleep and food and fellowship</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Together long.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="right">“How quick” to someone’s lip</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The words came, “will the beaten horse run home.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The word “home” raised a smile in us all three,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And one repeated it, smiling just so</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That all knew what he meant and none would say.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between three counties far apart that lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We were divided and looked strangely each</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the other, and we knew we were not friends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But fellows in a union that ends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the necessity for it, as it ought.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Never a word was spoken, not a thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was thought, of what the look meant with the word</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Home” as we walked and watched the sunset blurred.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then to me the word, only the word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Homesick,” as it were playfully occurred:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No more.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="right">If I should ever more admit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than the mere word I could not endure it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For a day longer: this captivity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must somehow come to an end, else I should be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another man, as often now I seem,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or this life be only an evil dream.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="theres-nothing-like-the-sun" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">There’s Nothing Like the Sun</h2>
			<p>
				<span>There’s nothing like the sun as the year dies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kind as it can be, this world being made so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To stones and men and beasts and birds and flies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To all things that it touches except snow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether on mountain side or street of town.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The south wall warms me: November has begun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet never shone the sun as fair as now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the sweet last-left damsons from the bough</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With spangles of the morning’s storm drop down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because the starling shakes it, whistling what</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once swallows sang. But I have not forgot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That there is nothing, too, like March’s sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like April’s, or July’s, or June’s, or May’s,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or January’s, or February’s, great days:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And August, September, October, and December</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have equal days, all different from November.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No day of any month but I have said⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or, if I could live long enough, should say⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“There’s nothing like the sun that shines to-day”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There’s nothing like the sun till we are dead.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="when-he-should-laugh" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">When He Should Laugh</h2>
			<p>
				<span>When he should laugh the wise man knows full well:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he knows what is truly laughable.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But wiser is the man who laughs also,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or holds his laughter, when the foolish do.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="an-old-song-1" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">An Old Song</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The sun set, the wind fell, the sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was like a mirror shaking:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The one small wave that clapped the land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mile-long snake of foam was making</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where tide had smoothed and wind had dried</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The vacant sand.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A light divided the swollen clouds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lay most perfectly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a straight narrow footbridge bright</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That crossed over the sea to me;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And no one else in the whole world</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw that same sight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I walked elate, my bridge always</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just one step from my feet:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A robin sang, a shade in shade:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all I did was to repeat:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I’ll go no more a-roving</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With you, fair maid.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The sailors’ song of merry loving</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With dusk and sea-gull’s mewing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mixed sweet, the lewdness far outweighed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the wild charm the chorus played:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I’ll go no more a-roving</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With you, fair maid:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A-roving, a-roving, since roving’s been my ruin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll go no more a-roving with you, fair maid.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In Amsterdam there dwelt a maid⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mark well what I do say⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Amsterdam there dwelt a maid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she was a mistress of her trade:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll go no more a-roving</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With you, fair maid:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A-roving, a-roving, since roving’s been my ruin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll go no more a-roving with you, fair maid.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-penny-whistle" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Penny Whistle</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The new moon hangs like an ivory bugle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the naked frosty blue;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the ghylls of the forest, already blackened</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Winter, are blackened anew.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The brooks that cut up and increase the forest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if they had never known</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sun, are roaring with black hollow voices</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Betwixt rage and a moan.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But still the caravan-hut by the hollies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a kingfisher gleams between:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round the mossed old hearths of the charcoal-burners</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First primroses ask to be seen.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The charcoal-burners are black, but their linen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blows white on the line;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And white the letter the girl is reading</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under that crescent fine;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And her brother who hides apart in a thicket,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slowly and surely playing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On a whistle an olden nursery melody,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Says far more than I am saying.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="lights-out" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Lights Out</h2>
			<p>
				<span>I have come to the borders of sleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The unfathomable deep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forest where all must lose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their way, however straight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or winding, soon or late;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They cannot choose.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Many a road and track</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, since the dawn’s first crack,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up to the forest brink,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deceived the travellers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Suddenly now blurs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in they sink.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Here love ends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Despair, ambition ends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All pleasure and all trouble,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although most sweet or bitter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here ends in sleep that is sweeter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than tasks most noble.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There is not any book</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or face of dearest look</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I would not turn from now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To go into the unknown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I must enter and leave alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I know not how.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The tall forest towers;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its cloudy foliage lowers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ahead, shelf above shelf;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its silence I hear and obey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I may lose my way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And myself.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="cock-crow" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Cock-Crow</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Out of the wood of thoughts that grows by night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be cut down by the sharp axe of light⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of the night, two cocks together crow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cleaving the darkness with a silver blow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bright before my eyes twin trumpeters stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heralds of splendour, one at either hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each facing each as in a coat of arms:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The milkers lace their boots up at the farms.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="words" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Words</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Out of us all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That make rhymes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will you choose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sometimes⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the winds use</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A crack in a wall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or a drain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their joy or their pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To whistle through⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Choose me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You English words?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I know you:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You are light as dreams,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tough as oak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Precious as gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As poppies and corn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or an old cloak:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweet as our birds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the ear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the burnet rose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the heat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Midsummer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strange as the races</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of dead and unborn:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strange and sweet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Equally,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And familiar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the dearest faces</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That a man knows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as lost homes are:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But though older far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than oldest yew⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As our hills are, old.⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Worn new</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Again and again:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Young as our streams</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After rain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as dear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the earth which you prove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That we love.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Make me content</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With some sweetness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Wales</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose nightingales</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have no wings⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Wiltshire and Kent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Herefordshire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the villages there⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the names, and the things</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No less.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Let me sometimes dance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or climb</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or stand perchance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In ecstasy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fixed and free</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a rhyme,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As poets do.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="i-never-saw-that-land-before" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">I Never Saw That Land Before</h2>
			<p>
				<span>I never saw that land before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now can never see it again;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet, as if by acquaintance hoar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Endeared, by gladness and by pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great was the affection that I bore</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To the valley and the river small,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cattle, the grass, the bare ash trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The chickens from the farmsteads, all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Elm-hidden, and the tributaries</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Descending at equal interval;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The blackthorns down along the brook</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With wounds yellow as crocuses</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where yesterday the labourer’s hook</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had sliced them cleanly; and the breeze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That hinted all and nothing spoke.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I neither expected anything</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor yet remembered: but some goal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I touched then; and if I could sing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What would not even whisper my soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As I went on my journeying,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I should use, as the trees and birds did,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A language not to be betrayed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And what was hid should still be hid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Excepting from those like me made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who answer when such whispers bid.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-dark-forest" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Dark Forest</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Dark is the forest and deep, and overhead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hang stars like seeds of light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In vain, though not since they were sown was bred</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Anything more bright.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And evermore mighty multitudes ride</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About, nor enter in;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the other multitudes that dwell inside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never yet was one seen.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The forest foxglove is purple, the marguerite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Outside is gold and white,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor can those that pluck either blossom greet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The others, day or night.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="celandine" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Celandine</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Thinking of her had saddened me at first,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until I saw the sun on the celandines lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Redoubled, and she stood up like a flame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A living thing, not what before I nursed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shadow I was growing to love almost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The phantom, not the creature with bright eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I had thought never to see, once lost.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She found the celandines of February</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Always before us all. Her nature and name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were like those flowers, and now immediately</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For a short swift eternity back she came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beautiful, happy, simply as when she wore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her brightest bloom among the winter hues</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all the world; and I was happy too,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seeing the blossoms and the maiden who</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had seen them with me Februarys before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bending to them as in and out she trod</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And laughed, with locks sweeping the mossy sod.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But this was a dream: the flowers were not true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until I stooped to pluck from the grass there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One of five petals and I smelt the juice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which made me sigh, remembering she was no more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gone like a never perfectly recalled air.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-ash-grove" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Ash Grove</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Half of the grove stood dead, and those that yet lived made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Little more than the dead ones made of shade.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If they led to a house, long before they had seen its fall:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But they welcomed me; I was glad without cause and delayed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Scarce a hundred paces under the trees was the Interval⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Paces each sweeter than sweetest miles⁠—but nothing at all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not even the spirits of memory and fear with restless wing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could climb down in to molest me over the wall</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>That I passed through at either end without noticing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now an ash grove far from those hills can bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The same tranquillity in which I wander a ghost</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a ghostly gladness, as if I heard a girl sing</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The song of the Ash Grove soft as love uncrossed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then in a crowd or in distance it were lost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the moment unveiled something unwilling to die</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I had what most I desired, without search or desert or cost.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="old-man" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Old Man</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Old Man, or Lad’s-love⁠—in the name there’s nothing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To one that knows not Lad’s-love, or Old Man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hoar-green feathery herb, almost a tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Growing with rosemary and lavender.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even to one that knows it well, the names</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Half decorate, half perplex, the thing it is:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At least, what that is clings not to the names</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In spite of time. And yet I like the names.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The herb itself I like not, but for certain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I love it, as some day the child will love it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who plucks a feather from the door-side bush</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whenever she goes in or out of the house.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Often she waits there, snipping the tips and shrivelling</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shreds at last on to the path, perhaps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thinking, perhaps of nothing, till she sniffs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her fingers and runs off. The bush is still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But half as tall as she, though it is as old;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So well she clips it. Not a word she says;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I can only wonder how much hereafter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She will remember, with that bitter scent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of garden rows, and ancient damson-trees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Topping a hedge, a bent path to a door,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A low thick bush beside the door, and me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forbidding her to pick.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="right">As for myself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where first I met the bitter scent is lost.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I, too, often shrivel the grey shreds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sniff them and think and sniff again and try</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once more to think what it is I am remembering,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Always in vain. I cannot like the scent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet I would rather give up others more sweet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With no meaning, than this bitter one.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I have mislaid the key. I sniff the spray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And think of nothing; I see and I hear nothing;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet seem, too, to be listening, lying in wait</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For what I should, yet never can, remember:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No garden appears, no path, no hoar-green bush</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Lad’s-love, or Old Man, no child beside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neither father nor mother, nor any playmate;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only an avenue, dark, nameless, without end.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-thrush" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Thrush</h2>
			<p>
				<span>When Winter’s ahead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What can you read in November</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That you read in April</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Winter’s dead?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I hear the thrush, and I see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him alone at the end of the lane</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near the bare poplar’s tip,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Singing continuously.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Is it more that you know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than that, even as in April,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So in November,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Winter is gone that must go?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Or is all your lore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not to call November November,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And April April,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Winter Winter⁠—no more?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But I know the months all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And their sweet names, April,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May and June and October,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As you call and call</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I must remember</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What died into April</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And consider what will be born</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a fair November;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And April I love for what</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was born of, and November</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For what it will die in,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What they are and what they are not,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>While you love what is kind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What you can sing in</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And love and forget in</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All that’s ahead and behind.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="i-built-myself-a-house-of-glass" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">I Built Myself a House of Glass</h2>
			<p>
				<span>I built myself a house of glass:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It took me years to make it:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I was proud. But now, alas,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would God someone would break it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But it looks too magnificent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No neighbour casts a stone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From where he dwells, in tenement</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or palace of glass, alone.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="february-afternoon" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">February Afternoon</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Men heard this roar of parleying starlings, saw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A thousand years ago even as now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Black rooks with white gulls following the plough</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So that the first are last until a caw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Commands that last are first again⁠—a law</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which was of old when one, like me, dreamed how</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A thousand years might dust lie on his brow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet thus would birds do between hedge and shaw.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Time swims before me, making as a day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A thousand years, while the broad ploughland oak</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Roars mill-like and men strike and bear the stroke</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of war as ever, audacious or resigned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And God still sits aloft in the array</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That we have wrought him, stone-deaf and stone-blind.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="digging-1" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Digging</h2>
			<p>
				<span>What matter makes my spade for tears or mirth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Letting down two clay pipes into the earth?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The one I smoked, the other a soldier</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Blenheim, Ramillies, and Malplaquet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perhaps. The dead man’s immortality</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lies represented lightly with my own,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A yard or two nearer the living air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than bones of ancients who, amazed to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Almighty God erect the mastodon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once laughed, or wept, in this same light of day.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="two-houses" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Two Houses</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Between a sunny bank and the sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The farmhouse smiles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the riverside plat:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No other one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So pleasant to look at</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And remember, for many miles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So velvet-hushed and cool under the warm tiles.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Not far from the road it lies, yet caught</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far out of reach</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the road’s dust</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the dusty thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of passers-by, though each</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stops, and turns, and must</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look down at it like a wasp at the muslined peach.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But another house stood there long before:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as if above graves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still the turf heaves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above its stones:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dark hangs the sycamore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shadowing kennel and bones</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the black dog that shakes his chain and moans.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And when he barks, over the river</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flashing fast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dark echoes reply,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the hollow past</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Half yields the dead that never</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More than half hidden lie:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And out they creep and back again for ever.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-mill-water" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Mill-Water</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Only the sound remains</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the old mill;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gone is the wheel;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the prone roof and walls the nettle reigns.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Water that toils no more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dangles white locks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, falling, mocks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The music of the mill-wheel’s busy roar.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Pretty to see, by day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its sound is naught</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Compared with thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And talk and noise of labour and of play.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Night makes the difference.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In calm moonlight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gloom infinite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sound comes surging in upon the sense:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Solitude, company⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When it is night⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grief or delight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By it must haunted or concluded be.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Often the silentness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has but this one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Companion;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherever one creeps in the other is:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Sometimes a thought is drowned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By it, sometimes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of it climbs;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All thoughts begin or end upon this sound,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Only the idle foam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of water falling</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Changelessly calling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where once men had a work-place and a home.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-dream" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Dream</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Over known fields with an old friend in dream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I walked, but came sudden to a strange stream.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its dark waters were bursting out most bright</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From a great mountain’s heart into the light.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They ran a short course under the sun, then back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into a pit they plunged, once more as black</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As at their birth; and I stood thinking there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How white, had the day shone on them, they were,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heaving and coiling. So by the roar and hiss</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by the mighty motion of the abyss</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I was bemused, that I forgot my friend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And neither saw nor sought him till the end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I awoke from waters unto men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saying: “I shall be here some day again.”</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="sedge-warblers" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Sedge-Warblers</h2>
			<p>
				<span>This beauty made me dream there was a time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long past and irrecoverable, a clime</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where any brook so radiant racing clear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through buttercup and kingcup bright as brass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But gentle, nourishing the meadow grass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That leans and scurries in the wind, would bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another beauty, divine and feminine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Child to the sun, a nymph whose soul unstained</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could love all day, and never hate or tire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A lover of mortal or immortal kin.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And yet, rid of this dream, ere I had drained</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its poison, quieted was my desire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So that I only looked into the water,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clearer than any goddess or man’s daughter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hearkened while it combed the dark green hair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shook the millions of the blossoms white</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of water-crowfoot, and curdled to one sheet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The flowers fallen from the chestnuts in the park</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far off. And sedge-warblers, clinging so light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To willow twigs, sang longer than the lark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quick, shrill, or grating, a song to match the heat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the strong sun, nor less the water’s cool,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gushing through narrows, swirling in the pool.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their song that lacks all words, all melody,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All sweetness almost, was dearer then to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than sweetest voice that sings in tune sweet words.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This was the best of May⁠—the small brown birds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wisely reiterating endlessly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What no man learnt yet, in or out of school.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="under-the-woods" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Under the Woods</h2>
			<p>
				<span>When these old woods were young</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thrushes’ ancestors</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As sweetly sung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the old years.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There was no garden here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Apples nor mistletoe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No children dear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ran to and fro.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>New then was this thatched cot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the keeper was old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he had not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Much lead or gold.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Most silent beech and yew:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As he went round about</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The woods to view</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seldom he shot.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But now that he is gone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of most memories,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still lingers on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A stoat of his,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But one, shrivelled and green,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with no scent at all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And barely seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On this shed wall.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="what-will-they-do" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">What Will They Do?</h2>
			<p>
				<span>What will they do when I am gone? It is plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That they will do without me as the rain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can do without the flowers and the grass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That profit by it and must perish without.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have but seen them in the loud street pass;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I was naught to them. I turned about</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see them disappearing carelessly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But what if I in them as they in me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nourished what has great value and no price?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Almost I thought that rain thirsts for a draught</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which only in the blossom’s chalice lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until that one turned back and lightly laughed.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-night" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To-Night</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Harry, you know at night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The larks in Castle Alley</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sing from the attic’s height</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if the electric light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were the true sun above a summer valley:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whistle, don’t knock, to-night.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I shall come early, Kate:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we in Castle Alley</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will sit close out of sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone, and ask no light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of lamp or sun above a summer valley:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To-night I can stay late.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-cat" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Cat</h2>
			<p>
				<span>She had a name among the children;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But no one loved though someone owned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her, locked her out of doors at bedtime</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And had her kittens duly drowned.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In Spring, nevertheless, this cat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ate blackbirds, thrushes, nightingales,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And birds of bright voice and plume and flight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As well as scraps from neighbours’ pails.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I loathed and hated her for this;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One speckle on a thrush’s breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was worth a million such; and yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She lived long, till God gave her rest.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-unknown" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Unknown</h2>
			<p>
				<span>She is most fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when they see her pass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The poets’ ladies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look no more in the glass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But after her.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>On a bleak moor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Running under the moon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She lures a poet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once proud or happy, soon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far from his door.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Beside a train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because they saw her go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or failed to see her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Travellers and watchers know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another pain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The simple lack</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of her is more to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than others’ presence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether life splendid be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or utter black.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I have not seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have no news of her;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I can tell only</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She is not here, but there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She might have been.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She is to be kissed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only perhaps by me;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She may be seeking</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Me and no other; she</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May not exist.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="song" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Song</h2>
			<p>
				<span>At poet’s tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweeter than any smiles but hers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She laughs; I sigh;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet I could not live if she should die.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And when in June</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once more the cuckoo spoils his tune,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She laughs at sighs;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet she says she loves me till she dies.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="she-dotes" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">She Dotes</h2>
			<p>
				<span>She dotes on what the wild birds say</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or hint or mock at, night and day⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thrush, blackbird, all that sing in May,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And songless plover,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hawk, heron, owl, and woodpecker.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They never say a word to her</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">About her lover.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She laughs at them for childishness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She cries at them for carelessness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who see her going loverless</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet sing and chatter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just as when he was not a ghost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor ever ask her what she has lost</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or what is the matter.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet she has fancied blackbirds hide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A secret, and that thrushes chide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because she thinks death can divide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her from her lover;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she has slept, trying to translate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The word the cuckoo cries to his mate</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Over and over.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="for-these" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">For These</h2>
			<p>
				<span>An acre of land between the shore and the hills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon a ledge that shows my kingdoms three,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lovely visible earth and sky and sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where what the curlew needs not, the farmer tills:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A house that shall love me as I love it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well-hedged, and honoured by a few ash-trees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That linnets, greenfinches, and goldfinches</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall often visit and make love in and flit:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A garden I need never go beyond,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Broken but neat, whose sunflowers every one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are fit to be the sign of the Rising Sun:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A spring, a brook’s bend, or at least a pond:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For these I ask not, but, neither too late</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor yet too early, for what men call content,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And also that something may be sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be contented with, I ask of fate.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="march-the-third" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">March the Third<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></h2>
			<p>
				<span>Here again (she said) is March the third</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And twelve hours singing for the bird</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twixt dawn and dusk, from half past six</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To half past six, never unheard.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>’Tis Sunday, and the church-bells end</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the birds do. I think they blend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now better than they will when passed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is this unnamed, unmarked godsend.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Or do all mark, and none dares say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How it may shift and long delay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Somewhere before the first of Spring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But never fails, this singing day?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And when it falls on Sunday, bells</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are a wild natural voice that dwells</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On hillsides; but the birds’ songs have</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The holiness gone from the bells.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This day unpromised is more dear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than all the named days of the year</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When seasonable sweets come in,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because we know how lucky we are.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-new-house" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The New House</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Now first, as I shut the door,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I was alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the new house; and the wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Began to moan.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Old at once was the house,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And I was old;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My ears were teased with the dread</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of what was foretold,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Nights of storm, days of mist, without end;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sad days when the sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shone in vain: old griefs and griefs</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not yet begun.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>All was foretold me; naught</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Could I foresee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I learned how the wind would sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">After these things should be.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="march" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">March</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Now I know that Spring will come again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perhaps to-morrow: however late I’ve patience</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After this night following on such a day.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>While still my temples ached from the cold burning</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of hail and wind, and still the primroses</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Torn by the hail were covered up in it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sun filled earth and heaven with a great light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a tenderness, almost warmth, where the hail dripped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if the mighty sun wept tears of joy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But ’twas too late for warmth. The sunset piled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mountains on mountains of snow and ice in the west:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Somewhere among their folds the wind was lost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet ’twas cold, and though I knew that Spring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would come again, I knew it had not come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That it was lost too in those mountains chill.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>What did the thrushes know? Rain, snow, sleet, hail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had kept them quiet as the primroses.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They had but an hour to sing. On boughs they sang,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On gates, on ground; they sang while they changed perches</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And while they fought, if they remembered to fight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So earnest were they to pack into that hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their unwilling hoard of song before the moon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grew brighter than the clouds. Then ’twas no time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For singing merely. So they could keep off silence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And night, they cared not what they sang or screamed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether ’twas hoarse or sweet or fierce or soft;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to me all was sweet: they could do no wrong.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Something they knew⁠—I also, while they sang</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And after. Not till night had half its stars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And never a cloud, was I aware of silence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stained with all that hour’s songs, a silence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saying that Spring returns, perhaps to-morrow.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-cuckoo" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Cuckoo</h2>
			<p>
				<span>That’s the cuckoo, you say. I cannot hear it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When last I heard it I cannot recall; but I know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too well the year when first I failed to hear it⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was drowned by my man groaning out to his sheep “Ho! Ho!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ten times with an angry voice he shouted</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Ho! Ho!” but not in anger, for that was his way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He died that Summer, and that is how I remember</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cuckoo calling, the children listening, and me saying, “Nay.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And now, as you said, “There it is,” I was hearing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not the cuckoo at all, but my man’s “Ho! Ho!” instead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I think that even if I could lose my deafness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cuckoo’s note would be drowned by the voice of my dead.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="over-the-hills" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Over the Hills</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Often and often it came back again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To mind, the day I passed the horizon ridge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To a new country, the path I had to find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By half-gaps that were stiles once in the hedge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pack of scarlet clouds running across</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The harvest evening that seemed endless then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And after, and the inn where all were kind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All were strangers. I did not know my loss</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till one day twelve months later suddenly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I leaned upon my spade and saw it all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though far beyond the sky-line. It became</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Almost a habit through the year for me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To lean and see it and think to do the same</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Again for two days and a night. Recall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was vain: no more could the restless brook</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ever turn back and climb the waterfall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the lake that rests and stirs not in its nook,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As in the hollow of the collar-bone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under the mountain’s head of rush and stone.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="home-2" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Home</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Often I had gone this way before:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now it seemed I never could be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And never had been anywhere else;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas home; one nationality</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We had, I and the birds that sang,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One memory.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They welcomed me. I had come back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That eve somehow from somewhere far:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The April mist, the chill, the calm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meant the same thing familiar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pleasant to us, and strange too,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet with no bar.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The thrush on the oaktop in the lane</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sang his last song, or last but one;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as he ended, on the elm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another had but just begun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His last; they knew no more than I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The day was done.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then past his dark white cottage front</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A labourer went along, his tread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slow, half with weariness, half with ease;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, through the silence, from his shed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sound of sawing rounded all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That silence said.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-hollow-wood" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Hollow Wood</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Out in the sun the goldfinch flits</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Along the thistle-tops, flits and twits</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above the hollow wood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where birds swim like fish⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fish that laugh and shriek⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To and fro, far below</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the pale hollow wood.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Lichen, ivy, and moss</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Keep evergreen the trees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That stand half-flayed and dying,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the dead trees on their knees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In dog’s-mercury and moss:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the bright twit of the goldfinch drops</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down there as he flits on thistle-tops.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="wind-and-mist" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Wind and Mist</h2>
			<p>
				<span>They met inside the gateway that gives the view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hollow land as vast as heaven. “It is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A pleasant day, sir.” “A very pleasant day.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And what a view here. If you like angled fields</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of grass and grain bounded by oak and thorn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here is a league. Had we with Germany</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To play upon this board it could not be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More dear than April has made it with a smile.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fields beyond that league close in together</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And merge, even as our days into the past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into one wood that has a shining pane</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of water. Then the hills of the horizon⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That is how I should make hills had I to show</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One who would never see them what hills were like.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Yes. Sixty miles of South Downs at one glance.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sometimes a man feels proud at them, as if</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had just created them with one mighty thought.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“That house, though modern, could not be better planned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For its position. I never liked a new</span>
				<br/>
				<span>House better. Could you tell me who lives in it?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“No one.” “Ah⁠—and I was peopling all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those windows on the south with happy eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The terrace under them with happy feet;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Girls⁠—” “Sir, I know. I know. I have seen that house</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through mist look lovely as a castle in Spain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And airier. I have thought: ’Twere happy there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To live.’ And I have laughed at that</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because I lived there then.” “Extraordinary.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Yes, with my furniture and family</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still in it, I, knowing every nook of it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And loving none, and in fact hating it.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Dear me! How could that be? But pardon me.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“No offence. Doubtless the house was not to blame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the eye watching from those windows saw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many a day, day after day, mist⁠—mist</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like chaos surging back⁠—and felt itself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone in all the world, marooned alone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We lived in clouds, on a cliff’s edge almost</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(You see), and if clouds went, the visible earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lay too far off beneath and like a cloud.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I did not know it was the earth I loved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until I tried to live there in the clouds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the earth turned to cloud.” “You had a garden</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of flint and clay, too.” “True; that was real enough.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The flint was the one crop that never failed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The clay first broke my heart, and then my back;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the back heals not. There were other things</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Real, too. In that room at the gable a child</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was born while the wind chilled a summer dawn:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never looked grey mind on a greyer one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than when the child’s cry broke above the groans.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I hope they were both spared.” “They were. Oh yes!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But flint and clay and childbirth were too real</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For this cloud-castle. I had forgot the wind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pray do not let me get on to the wind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You would not understand about the wind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is my subject, and compared with me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those who have always lived on the firm ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are quite unreal in this matter of the wind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There were whole days and nights when the wind and I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between us shared the world, and the wind ruled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I obeyed it and forgot the mist.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My past and the past of the world were in the wind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now you may say that though you understand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And feel for me, and so on, you yourself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would find it different. You are all like that</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If once you stand here free from wind and mist:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I might as well be talking to wind and mist.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You would believe the house-agent’s young man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who gives no heed to anything I say.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Good morning. But one word. I want to admit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I would try the house once more, if I could;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As I should like to try being young again.”</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-unknown-bird" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Unknown Bird</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Three lovely notes he whistled, too soft to be heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If others sang; but others never sang</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the great beech-wood all that May and June.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No one saw him: I alone could hear him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though many listened. Was it but four years</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ago? or five? He never came again.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Oftenest when I heard him I was alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor could I ever make another hear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>La-la-la! he called, seeming far-off⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if a cock crowed past the edge of the world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if the bird or I were in a dream.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet that he travelled through the trees and sometimes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neared me, was plain, though somehow distant still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sounded. All the proof is⁠—I told men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What I had heard.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="right">I never knew a voice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Man, beast, or bird, better than this. I told</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The naturalists; but neither had they heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Anything like the notes that did so haunt me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I had them clear by heart and have them still.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Four years, or five, have made no difference. Then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As now that La-la-la! was bodiless sweet:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sad more than joyful it was, if I must say</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That it was one or other, but if sad</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas sad only with joy too, too far off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For me to taste it. But I cannot tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If truly never anything but fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The days were when he sang, as now they seem.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This surely I know, that I who listened then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Happy sometimes, sometimes suffering</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A heavy body and a heavy heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now straightway, if I think of it, become</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Light as that bird wandering beyond my shore.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-lofty-sky" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Lofty Sky</h2>
			<p>
				<span>To-day I want the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tops of the high hills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above the last man’s house,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His hedges, and his cows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where, if I will, I look</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down even on sheep and rook,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of all things that move</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See buzzards only above:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Past all trees, past furze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thorn, where nought deters</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The desire of the eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For sky, nothing but sky.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I sicken of the woods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the multitudes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of hedge-trees. They are no more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than weeds upon this floor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the river of air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leagues deep, leagues wide, where</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am like a fish that lives</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In weeds and mud and gives</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What’s above him no thought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I might be a tench for aught</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I can do to-day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down on the wealden clay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even the tench has days</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he floats up and plays</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the lily leaves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sees the sky, or grieves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not if he nothing sees:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While I, I know that trees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under that lofty sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are weeds, fields mud, and I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would arise and go far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To where the lilies are.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="after-rain" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">After Rain</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The rain of a night and a day and a night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stops at the light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of this pale choked day. The peering sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sees what has been done.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The road under the trees has a border new</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of purple hue</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inside the border of bright thin grass:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For all that has</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Been left by November of leaves is torn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From hazel and thorn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the greater trees. Throughout the copse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No dead leaf drops</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On grey grass, green moss, burnt-orange fern,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the wind’s return:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The leaflets out of the ash-tree shed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are thinly spread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the road, like little black fish, inlaid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if they played.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What hangs from the myriad branches down there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So hard and bare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is twelve yellow apples lovely to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On one crab-tree.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on each twig of every tree in the dell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Uncountable</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crystals both dark and bright of the rain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That begins again.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="digging-2" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Digging</h2>
			<p>
				<span>To-day I think</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only with scents⁠—scents dead leaves yield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bracken, and wild carrot’s seed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the square mustard field;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Odours that rise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the spade wounds the root of tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rose, currant, raspberry, or goutweed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rhubarb or celery;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The smoke’s smell, too,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flowing from where a bonfire burns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dead, the waste, the dangerous,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all to sweetness turns.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>It is enough</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To smell, to crumble the dark earth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the robin sings over again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sad songs of Autumn mirth.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="but-these-things-also" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">But These Things Also</h2>
			<p>
				<span>But these things also are Spring’s⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On banks by the roadside the grass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long-dead that is greyer now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than all the Winter it was;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The shell of a little snail bleached</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the grass; chip of flint, and mite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of chalk; and the small birds’ dung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In splashes of purest white:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>All the white things a man mistakes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For earliest violets</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who seeks through Winter’s ruins</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Something to pay Winter’s debts,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>While the North blows, and starling flocks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By chattering on and on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Keep their spirits up in the mist,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Spring’s here, Winter’s not gone.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="april" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">April</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The sweetest thing, I thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At one time, between earth and heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was the first smile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When mist has been forgiven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the sun has stolen out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Peered, and resolved to shine at seven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On dabbled lengthening grasses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thick primroses and early leaves uneven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When earth’s breath, warm and humid, far surpasses</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The richest oven’s, and loudly rings “cuckoo”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sharply the nightingale’s “tsoo, tsoo, tsoo, tsoo”:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To say “God bless it” was all that I could do.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But now I know one sweeter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By far since the day Emily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turned weeping back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To me, still happy me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To ask forgiveness⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet smiled with half a certainty</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be forgiven⁠—for what</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She had never done; I knew not what it might be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor could she tell me, having now forgot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By rapture carried with me past all care</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As to an isle in April lovelier</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than April’s self. “God bless you” I said to her.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-barn" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Barn</h2>
			<p>
				<span>They should never have built a barn there, at all⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drip, drip, drip!⁠—under that elm tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though then it was young. Now it is old</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But good, not like the barn and me.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To-morrow they cut it down. They will leave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The barn, as I shall be left, maybe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What holds it up? ’Twould not pay to pull down.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well, this place has no other antiquity.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>No abbey or castle looks so old</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As this that Job Knight built in ’54,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Built to keep corn for rats and men.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now there’s fowls in the roof, pigs on the floor.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>What thatch survives is dung for the grass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The best grass on the farm. A pity the roof</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will not bear a mower to mow it. But</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only fowls have foothold enough.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Starlings used to sit there with bubbling throats</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Making a spiky beard as they chattered</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And whistled and kissed, with heads in air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till they thought of something else that mattered.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But now they cannot find a place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among all those holes, for a nest any more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It’s the turn of lesser things, I suppose.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once I fancied ’twas starlings they built it for.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-barn-and-the-down" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Barn and the Down</h2>
			<p>
				<span>It stood in the sunset sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the straight-backed down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many a time⁠—the barn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the edge of the town,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So huge and dark that it seemed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was the hill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till the gable’s precipice proved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It impossible.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then the great down in the west</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grew into sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A barn stored full to the ridge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With black of night;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And the barn fell to a barn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or even less</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before critical eyes and its own</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Late mightiness.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But far down and near barn and I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since then have smiled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Having seen my new cautiousness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By itself beguiled</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To disdain what seemed the barn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till a few steps changed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It past all doubt to the down;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So the barn was avenged.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-child-on-the-cliffs" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Child on the Cliffs</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Mother, the root of this little yellow flower</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the stones has the taste of quinine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Things are strange to-day on the cliff. The sun shines so bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the grasshopper works at his sewing-machine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So hard. Here’s one on my hand, mother, look;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I lie so still. There’s one on your book.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But I have something to tell more strange. So leave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your book to the grasshopper, mother dear⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a green knight in a dazzling market-place⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And listen now. Can you hear what I hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far out? Now and then the foam there curls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stretches a white arm out like a girl’s.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Fishes and gulls ring no bells. There cannot be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A chapel or church between here and Devon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With fishes or gulls ringing its bell⁠—hark.⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Somewhere under the sea or up in heaven.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“It’s the bell, my son, out in the bay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the buoy. It does sound sweet to-day.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Sweeter I never heard, mother, no, not in all Wales.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I should like to be lying under that foam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dead, but able to hear the sound of the bell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And certain that you would often come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rest, listening happily.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I should be happy if that could be.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="good-night" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Good Night</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The skylarks are far behind that sang over the down;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I can hear no more those suburb nightingales;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thrushes and blackbirds sing in the gardens of the town</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In vain: the noise of man, beast, and machine prevails.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But the call of children in the unfamiliar streets</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That echo with a familiar twilight echoing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweet as the voice of nightingale or lark, completes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A magic of strange welcome, so that I seem a king</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Among man, beast, machine, bird, child, and the ghost</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That in the echo lives and with the echo dies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The friendless town is friendly; homeless, I not lost;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though I know none of these doors, and meet but strangers’ eyes.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Never again, perhaps, after to-morrow, shall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I see these homely streets, these church windows alight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not a man or woman or child among them all:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But it is All Friends’ Night, a traveller’s good night.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-wasp-trap" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Wasp Trap</h2>
			<p>
				<span>This moonlight makes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lovely lovelier</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than ever before lakes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And meadows were.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And yet they are not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though this their hour is, more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lovely than things that were not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lovely before.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Nothing on earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the heavens no star,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For pure brightness is worth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More than that jar,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For wasps meant, now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A star⁠—long may it swing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the dead apple-bough,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So glistening.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="july" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">July</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Naught moves but clouds, and in the glassy lake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their doubles and the shadow of my boat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The boat itself stirs only when I break</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This drowse of heat and solitude afloat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To prove if what I see be bird or mote,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or learn if yet the shore woods be awake.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Long hours since dawn grew⁠—spread⁠—and passed on high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And deep below⁠—I have watched the cool reeds hung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over images more cool in imaged sky:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nothing there was worth thinking of so long;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All that the ring-doves say, far leaves among,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brims my mind with content thus still to lie.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-tale" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Tale</h2>
			<p>
				<span>There once the walls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the ruined cottage stood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The periwinkle crawls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With flowers in its hair into the wood.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In flowerless hours</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never will the bank fail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With everlasting flowers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On fragments of blue plates, to tell the tale.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="parting" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Parting</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The Past is a strange land, most strange.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wind blows not there, nor does rain fall:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If they do, they cannot hurt at all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Men of all kinds as equals range</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The soundless fields and streets of it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pleasure and pain there have no sting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The perished self not suffering</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That lacks all blood and nerve and wit,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And is in shadow-land a shade.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remembered joy and misery</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bring joy to the joyous equally;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both sadden the sad. So memory made</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Parting to-day a double pain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First because it was parting; next</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because the ill it ended vexed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mocked me from the Past again,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Not as what had been remedied</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had I gone on⁠—not that, oh no!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But as itself no longer woe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sighs, angry word and look and deed</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Being faded: rather a kind of bliss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For there spiritualized it lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the perpetual yesterday</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That naught can stir or stain like this.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="lovers" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Lovers</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The two men in the road were taken aback.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lovers came out shading their eyes from the sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And never was white so white, or black so black,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As her cheeks and hair. “There are more things than one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A man might turn into a wood for, Jack,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Said George; Jack whispered: “He has not got a gun.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It’s a bit too much of a good thing, I say.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They are going the other road, look. And see her run.”⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She ran.⁠—“What a thing it is, this picking may.”</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-girls-clear-eyes" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">That Girl’s Clear Eyes</h2>
			<p>
				<span>That girl’s clear eyes utterly concealed all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Except that there was something to reveal.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And what did mine say in the interval?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No more: no less. They are but as a seal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not to be broken till after I am dead;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then vainly. Every one of us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This morning at our tasks left nothing said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In spite of many words. We were sealed thus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like tombs. Nor until now could I admit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That all I cared for was the pleasure and pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I tasted in the stony square sunlit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or the dark cloisters, or shade of airy plane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While music blazed and children, line after line,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Marched past, hiding the “<b>Seventeen Thirty-Nine.</b>”</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-child-in-the-orchards" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Child in the Orchard</h2>
			<p>
				<span>“He rolls in the orchard: he is stained with moss</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with earth, the solitary old white horse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where is his father and where is his mother</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among all the brown horses? Has he a brother?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I know the swallow, the hawk, and the hern;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But there are two million things for me to learn.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Who was the lady that rode the white horse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With rings and bells to Banbury Cross?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was there no other lady in England beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That a nursery rhyme could take for a ride?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The swift, the swallow, the hawk, and the hern.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There are two million things for me to learn.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Was there a man once who straddled across</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The back of the Westbury White Horse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over there on Salisbury Plain’s green wall?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was he bound for Westbury, or had he a fall?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The swift, the swallow, the hawk, and the hern.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There are two million things for me to learn.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Out of all the white horses I know three,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the age of six; and it seems to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is so much to learn, for men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I dare not go to bed again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The swift, the swallow, the hawk, and the hern.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There are millions of things for me to learn.”</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-source" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Source</h2>
			<p>
				<span>All day the air triumphs with its two voices</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of wind and rain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As loud as if in anger it rejoices,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drowning the sound of earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That gulps and gulps in choked endeavour vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To swallow the rain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Half the night, too, only the wild air speaks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With wind and rain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till forth the dumb source of the river breaks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drowns the rain and wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bellows like a giant bathing in mighty mirth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The triumph of earth.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-mountain-chapel" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Mountain Chapel</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Chapel and gravestones, old and few,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are shrouded by a mountain fold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From sound and view</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of life. The loss of the brook’s voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Falls like a shadow. All they hear is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The eternal noise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of wind whistling in grass more shrill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than aught as human as a sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And saying still:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“ ’Tis but a moment since man’s birth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in another moment more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Man lies in earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For ever; but I am the same</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now, and shall be, even as I was</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before he came;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till there is nothing I shall be.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet there the sun shines after noon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So cheerfully</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The place almost seems peopled, nor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lacks cottage chimney, cottage hearth:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is not more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In size than is a cottage, less</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than any other empty home</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In homeliness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It has a garden of wild flowers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And finest grass and gravestones warm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In sunshine hours</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The year through. Men behind the glass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stand once a week, singing, and drown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The whistling grass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their ponies munch. And yet somewhere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near or far off, there’s a man could</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be happy here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or one of the gods perhaps, were they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not of inhuman stature dire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As poets say</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who have not seen them clearly; if</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At sound of any wind of the world</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In grass-blades stiff</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They would not startle and shudder cold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under the sun. When gods were young</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This wind was old.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="first-know-when-lost" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">First Known When Lost</h2>
			<p>
				<span>I never had noticed it until</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas gone⁠—the narrow copse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where now the woodman lops</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The last of the willows with his bill.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>It was not more than a hedge overgrown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One meadow’s breadth away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I passed it day by day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now the soil was bare as a bone,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And black betwixt two meadows green,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though fresh-cut faggot ends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of hazel made some amends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a gleam as if flowers they had been.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Strange it could have hidden so near!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now I see as I look</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the small winding brook,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A tributary’s tributary, rises there.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-word" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Word</h2>
			<p>
				<span>There are so many things I have forgot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That once were much to me, or that were not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All lost, as is a childless woman’s child</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And its child’s children, in the undefiled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Abyss of what can never be again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have forgot, too, names of the mighty men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That fought and lost or won in the old wars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of kings and fiends and gods, and most of the stars.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some things I have forgot that I forget.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But lesser things there are, remembered yet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than all the others. One name that I have not⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though ’tis an empty thingless name⁠—forgot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never can die because Spring after Spring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some thrushes learn to say it as they sing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is always one at mid-day saying it clear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tart⁠—the name, only the name I hear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While perhaps I am thinking of the elder scent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That is like food, or while I am content</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the wild rose scent that is like memory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This name suddenly is cried out to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From somewhere in the bushes by a bird</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over and over again, a pure thrush word.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="these-things-that-poets-said" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">These Things That Poets Said</h2>
			<p>
				<span>These things that poets said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of love seemed true to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I loved and I fed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On love and poetry equally.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But now I wish I knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If theirs were love indeed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or if mine were the true</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And theirs some other lovely weed:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For certainly not thus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then or thereafter, I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loved ever. Between us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Decide, good Love, before I die.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Only, that once I loved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By this one argument</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is very plainly proved:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I, loving not, am different.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="home-3" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Home</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Not the end: but there’s nothing more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweet Summer and Winter rude</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have loved, and friendship and love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The crowd and solitude:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But I know them: I weary not;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But all that they mean I know.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I would go back again home</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now. Yet how should I go?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This is my grief. That land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My home, I have never seen;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No traveller tells of it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>However far he has been.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Afid could I discover it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I fear my happiness there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or my pain, might be dreams of return</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here, to these things that were.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Remembering ills, though slight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet irremediable,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brings a worse, an impurer pang</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than remembering what was well.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>No: I cannot go back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And would not if I could.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until blindness come, I must wait</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And blink at what is not good.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="aspens" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Aspens</h2>
			<p>
				<span>All day and night, save winter, every weather,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above the inn, the smithy, and the shop,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The aspens at the cross-roads talk together</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of rain, until their last leaves fall from the top.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Out of the blacksmith’s cavern comes the ringing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of hammer, shoe, and anvil; out of the inn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The clink, the hum, the roar, the random singing⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sounds that for these fifty years have been.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The whisper of the aspens is not drowned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And over lightless pane and footless road,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Empty as sky, with every other sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not ceasing, calls their ghosts from their abode,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A silent smithy, a silent inn, nor fails</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the bare moonlight or the thick-furred gloom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In tempest or the night of nightingales,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To turn the cross-roads to a ghostly room.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And it would be the same were no house near.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over all sorts of weather, men, and times,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aspens must shake their leaves and men may hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But need not listen, more than to my rhymes.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Whatever wind blows, while they and I have leaves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We cannot other than an aspen be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That ceaselessly, unreasonably grieves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or so men think who like a different tree.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="an-old-song-2" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">An Old Song</h2>
			<p>
				<span>I was not apprenticed nor ever dwelt in famous Lincolnshire;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ve served one master ill and well much more than seven year;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And never took up to poaching as you shall quickly find;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But ’tis my delight of a shiny night in the season of the year.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I roamed where nobody had a right but keepers and squires, and there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I sought for nests, wild flowers, oak sticks, and moles, both far and near.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And had to run from farmers, and learnt the Lincolnshire song:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Oh, ’tis my delight of a shiny night in the season of the year.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I took those walks years after, talking with friend or dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or solitary musing; but when the moon shone clear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I had no joy or sorrow that could not be expressed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By “ ’Tis my delight of a shiny night in the season of the year.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Since then I’ve thrown away a chance to fight a gamekeeper;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I less often trespass, and what I see or hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is mostly from the road or path by day: yet still I sing:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Oh, ’tis my delight of a shiny night in the season of the year.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For if I am contented, at home or anywhere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or if I sigh for I know not what, or my heart beats with some fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is a strange kind of delight to sing or whistle just:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Oh, ’tis my delight of a shiny night in the season of the year.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And with this melody on my lips and no one by to care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Indoors, or out on shiny nights or dark in open air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am for a moment made a man that sings out of his heart:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Oh, ’tis my delight of a shiny night in the season of the year.”</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="there-was-a-time" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">There Was a Time</h2>
			<p>
				<span>There was a time when this poor frame was whole</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I had youth and never another care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or none that should have troubled a strong soul.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet, except sometimes in a frosty air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When my heels hammered out a melody</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From pavements of a city left behind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I never would acknowledge my own glee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because it was less mighty than my mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had dreamed of. Since I could not boast of strength</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great as I wished, weakness was all my boast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I sought yet hated pity till at length</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I earned it. Oh, too heavy was the cost.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now that there is something I could use</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My youth and strength for, I deny the age,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The care and weakness that I know⁠—refuse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To admit I am unworthy of the wage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Paid to a man who gives up eyes and breath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For what can neither ask nor heed his death.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="ambition" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Ambition</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Unless it was that day I never knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ambition. After a night of frost, before</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The March sun brightened and the South-west blew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jackdaws began to shout and float and soar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Already, and one was racing straight and high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone, shouting like a black warrior</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Challenges and menaces to the wide sky.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With loud long laughter then a woodpecker</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ridiculed the sadness of the owl’s last cry.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And through the valley where all the folk astir</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made only plumes of pearly smoke to tower</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over dark trees and white meadows happier</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than was Elysium in that happy hour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A train that roared along raised after it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And carried with it a motionless white bower</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of purest cloud, from end to end close-knit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So fair it touched the roar with silence. Time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was powerless while that lasted. I could sit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And think I had made the loveliness of prime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Breathed its life into it and were its lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And no mind lived save this ’twixt clouds and rime.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Omnipotent I was, nor even deplored</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I did nothing. But the end fell like a bell:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bower was scattered; far off the train roared.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But if this was ambition I cannot tell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What ’twas ambition for I know not well.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="no-one-cares-less-than-i" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">No One Cares Less Than I</h2>
			<p>
				<span>“No one cares less than I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nobody knows but God,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether I am destined to lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under a foreign clod,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were the words I made to the bugle call in the morning.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But laughing, storming, scorning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only the bugles know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What the bugles say in the morning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they do not care, when they blow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The call that I heard and made words to early this morning.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="roads" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Roads</h2>
			<p>
				<span>I love roads:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The goddesses that dwell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far along invisible</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are my favourite gods.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Roads go on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While we forget, and are</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forgotten like a star</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That shoots and is gone.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>On this earth ’tis sure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We men have not made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Anything that doth fade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So soon, so long endure:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The hill road wet with rain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the sun would not gleam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a winding stream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If we trod it not again.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They are lonely</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While we sleep, lonelier</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For lack of the traveller</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who is now a dream only.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>From dawn’s twilight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the clouds like sheep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the mountains of sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They wind into the night.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The next turn may reveal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heaven: upon the crest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The close pine clump, at rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And black, may Hell conceal.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Often footsore, never</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet of the road I weary,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though long and steep and dreary</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As it winds on for ever.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Helen of the roads,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mountain ways of Wales</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Mabinogion tales,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is one of the true gods,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Abiding in the trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The threes and fours so wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The larger companies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That by the roadside be,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And beneath the rafter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Else uninhabited</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Excepting by the dead;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And it is her laughter</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>At morn and night I hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the thrush cock sings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bright irrelevant things,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when the chanticleer</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Calls back to their own night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Troops that make loneliness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With their light footsteps’ press,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As Helen’s own are light.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now all roads lead to France</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And heavy is the tread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the living; but the dead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Returning lightly dance:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Whatever the road bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To me or take from me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They keep me company</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With their pattering,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Crowding the solitude</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the loops over the downs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hushing the roar of towns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And their brief multitude.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="this-is-no-case-of-petty-right-or-wrong" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">This Is No Case of Petty Right or Wrong</h2>
			<p>
				<span>This is no case of petty right or wrong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That politicians or philosophers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can judge. I hate not Germans, nor grow hot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With love of Englishmen, to please newspapers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside my hate for one fat patriot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My hatred of the Kaiser is love true:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A kind of god he is, banging a gong.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I have not to choose between the two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or between justice and injustice. Dinned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With war and argument I read no more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than in the storm smoking along the wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Athwart the wood. Two witches’ cauldrons roar.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From one the weather shall rise clear and gay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of the other an England beautiful</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And like her mother that died yesterday.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Little I know or care if, being dull,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I shall miss something that historians</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can rake out of the ashes when perchance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The phoenix broods serene above their ken.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But with the best and meanest Englishmen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am one in crying, God save England, lest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We lose what never slaves and cattle blessed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ages made her that made us from the dust:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She is all we know and live by, and we trust</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She is good and must endure, loving her so:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as we love ourselves we hate her foe.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-chalk-pit" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Chalk-Pit</h2>
			<p>
				<span>“Is this the road that climbs above and bends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round what was once a chalk-pit: now it is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By accident an amphitheatre.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some ash-trees standing ankle-deep in brier</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bramble act the parts, and neither speak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor stir.” “But see: they have fallen, every one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And brier and bramble have grown over them.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“That is the place. As usual no one is here.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hardly can I imagine the drop of the axe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the smack that is like an echo, sounding here.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I do not understand.” “Why, what I mean is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I have seen the place two or three times</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At most, and that its emptiness and silence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stillness haunt me, as if just before</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was not empty, silent, still, but full</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of life of some kind, perhaps tragical.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has anything unusual happened here?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Not that I know of. It is called the Dell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They have not dug chalk here for a century.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That was the ash-trees’ age. But I will ask.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“No. Do not. I prefer to make a tale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or better leave it like the end of a play,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Actors and audience and lights all gone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For so it looks now. In my memory</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Again and again I see it, strangely dark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And vacant of a life but just withdrawn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We have not seen the woodman with the axe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some ghost has left it now as we two came.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And yet you doubted if this were the road?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Well, sometimes I have thought of it and failed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To place it. No. And I am not quite sure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even now, this is it. For another place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Real or painted, may have combined with it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or I myself a long way back in time⁠ ⁠…”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Why, as to that, I used to meet a man⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I had forgotten⁠—searching for birds’ nests</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Along the road and in the chalk-pit too.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wren’s hole was an eye that looked at him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For recognition. Every nest he knew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He got a stiff neck, by looking this side or that,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spring after spring, he told me, with his laugh⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sort of laugh. He was a visitor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A man of forty⁠—smoked and strolled about.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At orts and crosses Pleasure and Pain had played</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On his brown features;⁠—I think both had lost;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mild and yet wild too. You may know the kind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And once or twice a woman shared his walks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A girl of twenty with a brown boy’s face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hair brown as a thrush or as a nut,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thick eyebrows, glinting eyes⁠—” “You have said enough.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A pair⁠—free thought, free love⁠—I know the breed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I shall not mix my fancies up with them.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“You please yourself. I should prefer the truth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or nothing. Here, in fact, is nothing at all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Except a silent place that once rang loud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And trees and us⁠—imperfect friends, we men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And trees since time began; and nevertheless</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between us still we breed a mystery.”</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="health" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Health</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Four miles at a leap, over the dark hollow land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the frosted steep of the down and its junipers black,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Travels my eye with equal ease and delight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And scarce could my body leap four yards.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This is the best and the worst of it⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never to know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet to imagine gloriously, pure health.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To-day, had I suddenly health,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I could not satisfy the desire of my heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unless health abated it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So beautiful is the air in its softness and clearness, while Spring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Promises all and fails in nothing as yet;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And what blue and what white is I never knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before I saw this sky blessing the land.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For had I health I could not ride or run or fly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So far or so rapidly over the land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As I desire: I should reach Wiltshire tired;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I should have changed my mind before I could be in Wales.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I could not love; I could not command love.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beauty would still be far off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>However many hills I climbed over;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Peace would still be farther.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Maybe I should not count it anything</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To leap these four miles with the eye;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And either I should not be filled almost to bursting with desire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or with my power desire would still keep pace.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet I am not satisfied</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even with knowing I never could be satisfied.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With health and all the power that lies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In maiden beauty, poet and warrior,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Caesar, Shakespeare, Alcibiades,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mazeppa, Leonardo, Michelangelo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In any maiden whose smile is lovelier</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than sunlight upon dew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I could not be as the wagtail running up and down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The warm tiles of the roof slope, twittering</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Happily and sweetly as if the sun itself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Extracted the song</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the hand makes sparks from the fur of a cat:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I could not be as the sun.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor should I be content to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As little as the bird or as mighty as the sun.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the bird knows not of the sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the sun regards not the bird.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I am almost proud to love both bird and sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though scarce this Spring could my body leap four yards.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="beauty" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Beauty</h2>
			<p>
				<span>What does it mean? Tired, angry, and ill at ease,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No man, woman, or child alive could please</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Me now. And yet I almost dare to laugh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because I sit and frame an epitaph⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Here lies all that no one loved of him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that loved no one.” Then in a trice that whim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has wearied. But, though I am like a river</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At fall of evening while it seems that never</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has the sun lighted it or warmed it, while</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cross breezes cut the surface to a file,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This heart, some fraction of me, happily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Floats through the window even now to a tree</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down in the misting, dim-lit, quiet vale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not like a pewit that returns to wail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For something it has lost, but like a dove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That slants unswerving to its home and love.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There I find my rest, and through the dusk air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flies what yet lives in me. Beauty is there.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="snow" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Snow</h2>
			<p>
				<span>In the gloom of whiteness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the great silence of snow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A child was sighing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bitterly saying: “Oh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They have killed a white bird up there on her nest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The down is fluttering from her breast.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And still it fell through that dusky brightness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the child crying for the bird of the snow.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-new-year" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The New Year</h2>
			<p>
				<span>He was the one man I met up in the woods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That stormy New Year’s morning; and at first sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fifty yards off, I could not tell how much</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the strange tripod was a man. His body,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bowed horizontal, was supported equally</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By legs at one end, by a rake at the other:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus he rested, far less like a man than</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His wheel-barrow in profile was like a pig.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when I saw it was an old man bent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the same moment came into my mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The games at which boys bend thus, <em>High-Cockalorum</em>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or <em>Fly-the-garter</em>, and <em>Leap-frog</em>. At the sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of footsteps he began to straighten himself;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His head rolled under his cape like a tortoise’s;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He took an unlit pipe out of his mouth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Politely ere I wished him “A Happy New Year,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with his head cast upward sideways muttered⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So far as I could hear through the trees’ roar⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Happy New Year, and may it come fastish, too,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While I strode by and he turned to raking leaves.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-brook" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Brook</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Seated once by a brook, watching a child</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chiefly that paddled, I was thus beguiled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mellow the blackbird sang and sharp the thrush</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not far off in the oak and hazel brush,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unseen. There was a scent like honeycomb</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From mugwort dull. And down upon the dome</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the stone the cart-horse kicks against so oft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A butterfly alighted. From aloft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He took the heat of the sun, and from below.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the hot stone he perched contented so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if never a cart would pass again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That way; as if I were the last of men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he the first of insects to have earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sun together and to know their worth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I was divided between him and the gleam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The motion, and the voices, of the stream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The waters running frizzled over gravel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That never vanish and for ever travel.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A grey flycatcher silent on a fence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I sat as if we had been there since</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The horseman and the horse lying beneath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fir-tree-covered barrow on the heath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The horseman and the horse with silver shoes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Galloped the downs last. All that I could lose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I lost. And then the child’s voice raised the dead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“No one’s been here before” was what she said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And what I felt, yet never should have found</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A word for, while I gathered sight and sound.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-other" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Other</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The forest ended. Glad I was</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To feel the light, and hear the hum</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of bees, and smell the drying grass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the sweet mint, because I had come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To an end of forest, and because</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here was both road and inn, the sum</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of what’s not forest. But ’twas here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They asked me if I did not pass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yesterday this way? “Not you? Queer.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Who then? and slept here?” I felt fear.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I learnt his road and, ere they were</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sure I was I, left the dark wood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behind, kestrel and woodpecker,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The inn in the sun, the happy mood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When first I tasted sunlight there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I travelled fast, in hopes I should</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Outrun that other. What to do</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When caught, I planned not. I pursued</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To prove the likeness, and, if true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To watch until myself I knew.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I tried the inns that evening</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a long gabled high-street grey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of courts and outskirts, travelling</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An eager but a weary way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In vain. He was not there. Nothing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Told me that ever till that day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had one like me entered those doors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save once. That time I dared: “You may</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Recall”⁠—but never-foamless shores</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make better friends than those dull boors.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Many and many a day like this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aimed at the unseen moving goal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And nothing found but remedies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For all desire. These made not whole;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They sowed a new desire, to kiss</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Desire’s self beyond control,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Desire of desire. And yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Life stayed on within my soul.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One night in sheltering from the wet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I quite forgot I could forget.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A customer, then the landlady</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stared at me. With a kind of smile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They hesitated awkwardly:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their silence gave me time for guile.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had anyone called there like me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I asked. It was quite plain the wile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Succeeded. For they poured out all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that was naught. Less than a mile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond the inn, I could recall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was like me in general.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He had pleased them, but I less.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I was more eager than before</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To find him out and to confess,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bore him and to let him bore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I could not wait: children might guess</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I had a purpose, something more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That made an answer indiscreet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One girl’s caution made me sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too indignant even to greet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That other had we chanced to meet.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I sought then in solitude.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wind had fallen with the night; as still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The roads lay as the ploughland rude,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dark and naked, on the hill.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had there been ever any feud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twixt earth and sky, a mighty will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Closed it: the crocketed dark trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A dark house, dark impossible</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cloud-towers, one star, one lamp, one peace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Held on an everlasting lease:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And all was earth’s, or all was sky’s;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No difference endured between</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The two. A dog barked on a hidden rise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A marshbird whistled high unseen;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The latest waking blackbird’s cries</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perished upon the silence keen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The last light filled a narrow firth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the clouds. I stood serene,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with a solemn quiet mirth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An old inhabitant of earth.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Once the name I gave to hours</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like this was melancholy, when</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was not happiness and powers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Coming like exiles home again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And weaknesses quitting their bowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smiled and enjoyed, far off from men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moments of everlastingness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fortunate my search was then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While what I sought, nevertheless,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I was seeking, I did not guess.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>That time was brief: once more at inn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And upon road I sought my man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till once amid a tap-room’s din</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loudly he asked for me, began</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To speak, as if it had been a sin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of how I thought and dreamed and ran</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After him thus, day after day:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He lived as one under a ban</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For this: what had I got to say?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I said nothing, I slipped away.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And now I dare not follow after</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too close. I try to keep in sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dreading his frown and worse his laughter.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I steal out of the wood to light;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I see the swift shoot from the rafter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the inn door: ere I alight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I wait and hear the starlings wheeze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And nibble like ducks: I wait his flight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He goes: I follow: no release</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until he ceases. Then I also shall cease.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="house-and-man" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">House and Man</h2>
			<p>
				<span>One hour: as dim he and his house now look</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As a reflection in a rippling brook,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While I remember him; but first, his house.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Empty it sounded. It was dark with forest boughs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That brushed the walls and made the mossy tiles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Part of the squirrels’ track. In all those miles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of forest silence and forest murmur, only</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One house⁠—“Lonely!” he said, “I wish it were lonely”⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which the trees looked upon from every side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that was his.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="right">He waved good-bye to hide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sigh that he converted to a laugh.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He seemed to hang rather than stand there, half</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ghost-like, half like a beggar’s rag, clean wrung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And useless on the brier where it has hung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long years a-washing by sun and wind and rain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But why I call back man and house again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is that now on a beech-tree’s tip I see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As then I saw⁠—I at the gate, and he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the house darkness⁠—a magpie veering about,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A magpie like a weathercock in doubt.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-gypsy" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Gypsy</h2>
			<p>
				<span>A fortnight before Christmas Gypsies were everywhere:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vans were drawn up on wastes, women trailed to the fair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“My gentleman,” said one, “You’ve got a lucky face.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And you’ve a luckier,” I thought, “if such a grace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And impudence in rags are lucky.” “Give a penny</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the poor baby’s sake.” “Indeed I have not any</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unless you can give change for a sovereign, my dear.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Then just half a pipeful of tobacco can you spare?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I gave it. With that much victory she laughed content.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I should have given more, but off and away she went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With her baby and her pink sham flowers to rejoin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rest before I could translate to its proper coin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gratitude for her grace. And I paid nothing then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As I pay nothing now with the dipping of my pen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For her brother’s music when he drummed the tambourine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stamped his feet, which made the workmen passing grin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While his mouth-organ changed to a rascally Bacchanal dance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Over the hills and far away.” This and his glance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Outlasted all the fair, farmer and auctioneer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cheap-jack, balloon-man, drover with crooked stick, and steer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pig, turkey, goose, and duck, Christmas Corpses to be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not even the kneeling ox had eyes like the Romany.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That night he peopled for me the hollow wooded land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More dark and wild than stormiest heavens, that I searched and scanned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a ghost new-arrived. The gradations of the dark</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were like an underworld of death, but for the spark</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the Gypsy boy’s black eyes as he played and stamped his tune,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Over the hills and far away,” and a crescent moon.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="man-and-dog" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Man and Dog</h2>
			<p>
				<span>“ ’Twill take some getting.” “Sir, I think ’twill so.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The old man stared up at the mistletoe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That hung too high in the poplar’s crest for plunder</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of any climber, though not for kissing under:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then he went on against the north-east wind⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Straight but lame, leaning on a staff new-skinned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Carrying a brolly, flag-basket, and old coat⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Towards Alton, ten miles off. And he had not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Done less from Chilgrove where he pulled up docks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twere best, if he had had “a money-box,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To have waited there till the sheep cleared a field</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For what a half-week’s flint-picking would yield.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His mind was running on the work he had done</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since he left Christchurch in the New Forest, one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spring in the ‘seventies⁠—navvying on dock and line</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Southampton to Newcastle-on-Tyne⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In ‘seventy-four a year of soldiering</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the Berkshires⁠—hoeing and harvesting</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In half the shires where corn and couch will grow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His sons, three sons, were fighting, but the hoe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And reap-hook he liked, or anything to do with trees.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He fell once from a poplar tall as these:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Flying Man they called him in hospital.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“If I flew now, to another world I’d fall.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He laughed and whistled to the small brown bitch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With spots of blue that hunted in the ditch.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her foxy Welsh grandfather must have paired</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath him. He kept sheep in Wales and scared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strangers, I will warrant, with his pearl eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And trick of shrinking off as he were shy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then following close in silence for⁠—for what?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“No rabbit, never fear, she ever got,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet always hunts. To-day she nearly had one:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She would and she wouldn’t. ’Twas like that. The bad one!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She’s not much use, but still she’s company,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though I’m not. She goes everywhere with me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So Alton I must reach to-night somehow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll get no shakedown with that bedfellow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From farmers. Many a man sleeps worse to-night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than I shall.” “In the trenches.” “Yes, that’s right.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But they’ll be out of that⁠—I hope they be⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This weather, marching after the enemy.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And so I hope. Good luck.” And there I nodded</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“good night. You keep straight on.” Stiffly he plodded;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And at his heels the crisp leaves scurried fast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the leaf-coloured robin watched. They passed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The robin till next day, the man for good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Together in the twilight of the wood.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-private" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Private</h2>
			<p>
				<span>This ploughman dead in battle slept out of doors</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many a frozen night, and merrily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Answered staid drinkers, good bedmen, and all bores:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“At <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Greenland’s Hawthorn Bush,” said he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I slept.” None knew which bush. Above the town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond “The Drover,” a hundred spot the down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Wiltshire. And where now at last he sleeps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More sound in France⁠—that, too, he secret keeps.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="out-in-the-dark" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Out in the Dark</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Out in the dark over the snow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fallow fawns invisible go</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the fallow doe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the winds blow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fast as the stars are slow.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Stealthily the dark haunts round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, when a lamp goes, without sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At a swifter bound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than the swiftest hound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arrives, and all else is drowned;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And I and star and wind and deer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are in the dark together⁠—near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet far⁠—and fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drums on my ear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In that sage company drear.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>How weak and little is the light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the universe of sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love and delight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If you love it not, of night.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-lane" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Lane</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Some day, I think, there will be people enough</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Froxfield to pick all the blackberries</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of the hedges of Green Lane, the straight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Broad lane where now September hides herself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In bracken and blackberry, harebell and dwarf gorse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To-day, where yesterday a hundred sheep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were nibbling, halcyon bells shake to the sway</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of waters that no vessel ever sailed⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It is a kind of spring: the chaffinch tries</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His song. For heat it is like summer too.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This might be winter’s quiet. While the glint</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of hollies dark in the swollen hedge lasts -</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One mile⁠—and those bells ring, little I know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or heed if time be still the same, until</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lane ends and once more all is the same.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-watchers" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Watchers</h2>
			<p>
				<span>By the Ford at the town’s edge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Horse and carter rest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The carter smokes on the bridge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Watching the water press in swathes about his horse’s chest.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>From the inn one watches, too,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the room for visitors</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That has no fire, but a view</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many cases of stuffed fish, vermin, and kingfishers.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
